

-- 1 of 630 --

Praise for Platform Engineering
Platform Engineering distills an enormous amount of actionable and
nuanced advice into a well organized and readable guide. Everyone
who’s building systems at scale needs to read it.
—Adrian Cockcroft, Technology Consultant at
Orionx.net, previously Cloud Architect at Netflix and
AWS VP Architecture Strategy
The authors cut through the platform engineering hype and get right
to the reality of building and managing internal platforms. They draw
on their direct experience as they share techniques for avoiding
common failure modes and creating platforms that are trusted, and
even loved.
—Tanya Reilly, author of The Staff Engineer’s Path
Platform engineering is a team sport. This is your playbook.
—Kelsey Hightower, former Google Distinguished
Engineer and coauthor of Kubernetes: Up & Running

-- 2 of 630 --

This book makes a compelling case for the platform as a product, for
organizations of all sizes. It highlights the role of the platform as an
enabler of success, rather than a constraint on how things can be
done.
—Sam Newman, technologist and author
Platform engineering is challenging to get right: initiatives can take
months or years of effort to pay off, and it’s difficult to link those
initiatives directly to business outcomes. Camille and Ian have the
hard-won experience of building great platform engineering groups,
and it shines through this fantastic book. They show how to build
good teams, pick the right initiatives, navigate organizational politics,
and how to know whether you are succeeding.
—Sarah Wells, independent consultant and author
Camille Fournier and Ian Nowland, both figuratively and literally,
wrote the book on platform engineering. Their book is the definitive
reference on understanding and building platform engineering. I
highly recommend it.
—James Turnbull, CTO and author

-- 3 of 630 --

A must-read for any leader who is embarking on their platform
engineering journey. This book is a detailed map for navigating
technical, organizational and systemic challenges, and building high
leverage platforms through the lens of deep expertise, humble
experiences and cognitive empathy.
—Smruti Patel, VP of Engineering at Apollo GraphQL

-- 4 of 630 --

Platform Engineering
A Guide for Technical, Product, and People Leaders
Camille Fournier and Ian Nowland

-- 5 of 630 --

Platform Engineering
by Camille Fournier and Ian Nowland
Copyright © 2025 Camille Fournier and Ian Nowland. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles
(http://oreilly.com). For more information, contact our
corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Acquisitions Editor: David Michelson
Development Editor: Virginia Wilson
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Copyeditor: Rachel Head
Proofreader: Piper Editorial Consulting, LLC
Indexer: WordCo Indexing Services, Inc.

-- 6 of 630 --

Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
October 2024: First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2024-10-08: First Release
See http://oreilly.com/catalog/errata.csp?isbn=9781098153649 for release
details.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Platform Engineering, the cover image, and related trade dress are
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
The views expressed in this work are those of the authors, and do not
represent the publisher’s views or the views of the authors’ current or
former employers. While the publisher and the authors have used good faith
efforts to ensure that the information and instructions contained in this work
are accurate, the publisher and the authors disclaim all responsibility for
errors or omissions, including without limitation responsibility for damages
resulting from the use of or reliance on this work. Use of the information
and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If any code
samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to

-- 7 of 630 --

open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses
and/or rights.
978-1-098-15364-9
[LSI]

-- 8 of 630 --

Foreword
In my career, I’ve had the privilege of working with hundreds of
organizations and leaders to help them deliver value to their customers
through software. It all began with the DORA research program, which set
the standard for measuring software delivery performance in the industry.
Over the years, I’ve also researched how we can improve the developer
experience to fuel innovation in complex software environments. In the
midst of technological transformations, I’ve seen companies struggle with
the complexities, often pinning their hopes on a shift to the cloud as a cure-
all solution, only to find that more groundwork is needed.
This is where platform engineering plays a vital role, providing a crucial
foundation for boosting agility, speeding up time to market, and enhancing
overall product quality and user experience. By standardizing tools,
infrastructure, and workflows, platform engineering streamlines
development, fosters collaboration, and amps up efficiency among teams.
It’s the backbone that ensures scalability, reliability, and security,
empowering organizations to keep pace with evolving needs while
maintaining top-notch performance.
Yet, despite its significance, there’s a glaring lack of resources guiding
organizations through platform engineering work. This book steps in to fill
that void, offering practical advice that extends beyond the developer

-- 9 of 630 --

experience to thinking about your infrastructure holistically and planning
for what happens beyond putting your code into production—that is,
explicitly including a systems focus in the work.
As you dive into these pages, you’ll find insights into key questions like
when to kick off a platform project, how to structure your platform team,
and what sets platform planning apart from other initiatives. As well as
addressing the overarching challenges and motivations, Camille and Ian
provide clear, actionable advice—from defining team roles to nailing
stakeholder management—that you can put into practice right away.
Chapter 4 presents a breakdown of key roles and responsibilities within a
platform engineering team, alongside interview strategies and tips for
structuring engineering ladders for success. Chapter 5 does the not-obvious-
until-it-is work of telling us why platforms should be treated like products,
complete with product discovery and evolution, roadmaps, customer
support, and migration plans, each adapted to internal applications and
stakeholders. Those who are familiar with my work will know I’m a sucker
for an effective set of metrics; I’m fond of them because good data helps me
understand context and diagnose problems. The authors step in here with
the power-interest grid introduced in Chapter 10, which serves as a
powerful tool for evaluating workplace dynamics, offering clear guidance
for informed decision making.

-- 10 of 630 --

So as you embark on your own platform engineering journey, I encourage
you not only to absorb the knowledge inside but also to roll up your sleeves
and apply it in your own context. Let this book be your guide as you
navigate the complexities of platform engineering, guiding you toward
success in your organization’s tech endeavors.
Nicole Forsgren, PhD
March 2024
Partner Research Manager, Microsoft
Lead author, Accelerate

-- 11 of 630 --

Preface
A Note from Camille
In 2017, right as my first book was being published, I took a new job as
head of platform engineering. This is where I first met Ian, newly moved to
NYC from Seattle, where he had spent several years at Amazon and AWS.
We were fast allies: two people who found themselves in the situation of
helping a group of brilliant engineers turn around their organizational
reputation from one of “a team that builds what they think is fun without
enough concern for customer needs or stability” to a mature, well-operated,
customer-focused platform team.
Over the next couple of years, we laid the groundwork for that turnaround.
Ian taught me the value of everything he had learned in his time at Amazon:
from writing six-pagers for design and planning to hiring systems engineers
to establishing stronger operational practices (as well as injecting a heavy
dose of skepticism about user-level networking). I brought in a focus on
product management, decisive leadership, goal setting, and general
willingness to change things that needed to be changed in pursuit of
organizational excellence. Together with the technical, product,
management, and operational expertise of the other platform leads, we
succeeded in changing the culture of our teams and implementing a lot of
the practices you will read about throughout this book.

-- 12 of 630 --

When Ian left a couple of years later to tackle this challenge in the growth
startup world, we stayed in close touch. Ian was (unsurprisingly) a very
successful startup executive, and as we continued to evolve as leaders of
platform teams, we supported one another through the peaks and chasms of
career growth.
Fast-forward to early 2023, and I had a nagging idea: given the increasing
popularity of “platform engineering,” what if I wrote a book on it? I was
working a big job and didn’t think I could trust myself to tackle such a
project alone, but I realized that I knew the perfect coauthor—someone who
was a good writer, a clear thinker, and had strong opinions on the topic: Ian!
One text message and a video chat later, we were pitching O’Reilly, and
now here we are.
That trip down memory lane is all to say that we are writing this book
because platform engineering has been our passion and profession for many
years. While the term may be a recent technology buzzword, we’ve been in
the trenches trying to figure out how to do it well for much longer than the
latest hype cycle.
The truth is that most platform engineering teams we hear about have that
same reputation the organization I mentioned earlier started with: building
tech for the fun of it, without care for who needs it, and often without even
the operational maturity that such critical work deserves. And this is
because doing platform engineering is hard! When you strip away the hype,

-- 13 of 630 --

what we think you’ll find is an evolution of organizational maturity. Now
that we know about product management, we have no excuse to keep
bumbling around building things just because they seem fun to build. We
can’t keep hiding behind the challenges of planning to excuse our inability
to execute well. If we want to be trusted to provide critical systems to other
engineers, we need to care about the operational stability of those systems.
This book is about all that and more. All of the hard lessons we’ve learned
over the years of doing this have been the baseline for writing this book.
And to make sure we’ve got enough data, we’ve asked several other experts
in various areas of platforms from across the industry to contribute their
advice and stories.

-- 14 of 630 --

Who This Book Is For
This book is focused on the technical, product, and people leaders in
organizations that engineer and operate software platforms: senior
engineers; architects; product, program, and engineering managers. Most of
these readers understand intuitively that platforms are not just about
building automation for the cloud and open source systems, but they lack
both a clearer definition of what they should be doing and the practices to
do it well.
We also hope to reach the broader technology leadership community: the
CTOs, SVPs, and “product engineering” leadership team. These leaders
have a tendency to ask questions like “Why is the platform organization so
big when we also have AWS?” “Why does our platform have all this
headcount but still move so slowly?” and “Why didn’t our recent adoption
of [public cloud/SRE/developer experience] solve this?” The first two
chapters of the book should start to answer these basic questions, and many
of the techniques we spell out in the later chapters will be useful to product
organizations as well (and may even provoke some introspection by these
leaders!).
Finally, this book is really for anyone interested in learning how to make
platform engineering work beyond the technical implementation details.
Whether you are at a startup wondering when to start, a big company

-- 15 of 630 --

thinking about moving from infrastructure engineering to platform
engineering, or anywhere in between, this book is for you.
How to Read This Book
The book is divided into three parts.
Part I, “The What and Why of Platform Engineering”, introduces the basics
of platform engineering: what it is, why to do it, and its core pillars. These
two brief chapters are intended to ground you in what we mean when we
talk about platform engineering.
Part II, “Platform Engineering Practices”, is the meat of the book: eight
chapters full of detailed advice on different common challenges in the
platform space. We expect these chapters to provide an overview of
important leadership and execution concepts and practices. There is an
occasional bit of more technical content, but this book is not intended to
teach you about the underpinning technologies of platforms. Rather, it
focuses on the organizational practices that are needed to succeed in this
space. Some of these chapters can only provide a high-level overview to
what could be an entire book’s content (for example, the chapter on
platform as a product is long and still barely scratches the surface); we hope
that those of you who read this and have more ideas will share them with
the tech community in blog posts, talks, and books of your own.

-- 16 of 630 --

Finally, Part III, “What Does Success Look Like?”, pulls it all together.
This is where we share more stories of success—or, in many cases, partial
success—and give you an idea of what it might look like if you start to
apply the practices from Part II.
O’Reilly Online Learning
NOTE
For more than 40 years, O’Reilly Media has provided technology and business training, knowledge,
and insight to help companies succeed.
Our unique network of experts and innovators share their knowledge and
expertise through books, articles, and our online learning platform.
O’Reilly’s online learning platform gives you on-demand access to live
training courses, in-depth learning paths, interactive coding environments,
and a vast collection of text and video from O’Reilly and 200+ other
publishers. For more information, visit https://oreilly.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:

-- 17 of 630 --

O’Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-889-8969 (in the United States or Canada)
707-827-7019 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
support@oreilly.com
https://oreilly.com/about/contact.html
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at
https://oreil.ly/platformEngineering.
For news and information about our books and courses, visit
https://oreilly.com.
Find us on LinkedIn: https://linkedin.com/company/oreilly-media.
Watch us on YouTube: https://youtube.com/oreillymedia.
Acknowledgments
From Camille

-- 18 of 630 --

The list of people to thank for their help with this book is longer than my
arm.
Thank you to my buddies: Ben, Leif, Kelly, Renee, Scott, Nicole, Jordan,
Coda, Ale, Tim, Pete, James, Greg, Kyle, Juan, Caitie, Tasha, Ines, Alex,
Lita, Nathan, Zach, Maggie, Silvia, Marco, Kellan, André, Brad, Alexis,
Adam, Laura, Jason, Selena, Daniel, Chris, David, Carla, Bea, Danielle,
Fiona, Dan, Peter. You’ve all made contributions major and minor to this
book, and I couldn’t have done it without your collective wisdom.
Thank you to all of my many colleagues who have taught me so much over
the years, and special thanks to Alfred Spector for giving me the chance to
become a leader in this space.
Thanks to my husband, Chris, for taking on most of the parenting duties
while I spent hours writing, and for occasionally deigning to help me think
through a particularly tricky section. I would not be the writer I am today
without you.
And finally, the biggest thank you to Ian, for being a fantastic collaborator
and putting up with my occasional need to completely rework things (not
always for the better). I always learn things from you, and I’m grateful you
agreed to be my partner in this endeavor.
From Ian

-- 19 of 630 --

I would like to start by thanking my wife Sam, who over the years has had
to listen to many frustrated complaints about colleagues “doing the wrong
things” by the platforms my teams were trying to build. Those complaints
eventually subsided as I learned the lessons that make up much of the
material in this book.
I also want to thank a lot of my colleagues, from whom I directly and
indirectly picked up the techniques and perspectives included here. In
particular, Peter Desantis, James Hamilton, and Curt Ohrt at AWS were the
three who helped me make the transition to seeing engineering leadership as
a discipline. I also learned a lot from those who reported up to me along the
way: Ashley Miller, Ivo Dmitrov, Johan Anderson, Sesh Nalla, Rob Boll,
Remi Hakim, Conor Branagan, Joel Barciauskas, Makoto Nozaki, Andrew
Kochut, Chris Fortier, Brian Barrett, Jack Bomkamp, Daniel Podwall, Tim
Flowers, and Tim O’Hare.
Finally, my thanks to Camille for asking me to write this book with her. I
was between jobs and able to spend five hours a day writing, but Camille
had a full-time job and so for months spent her evenings and weekends
writing. We got there in the end.
From Both of Us
We would both like to thank the team at O’Reilly for all their edits and
other help: Virginia Wilson, David Michelson, Sarah Grey, and Melissa

-- 20 of 630 --

Duffield. They also coordinated a great team of technical reviewers we need
to thank: Tanya Reilly, Cian Synnott, Raju Gandhi, Matt Holford, Diego
Quiroga, Jordan West, James Turnbull, Sarah Wells, Niall Murphy, and
Smruti Patel—with a big callout to Diego, Jordan, James, and Smruti for
their substantial contributions, as well as Kelly Shortridge, Leif Walsh, and
Nicole Forsgren for theirs.

-- 21 of 630 --

Part I. The What and Why of Platform
Engineering
Innovation is not born from the dream, innovation is born from the
struggle.
—Simon Sinek, Start with Why
If you’re reading this book because you are already working in platform
engineering and looking for tips on how to do it better, you might be
tempted to skip these first couple of chapters. After all, they will hopefully
tell you what you already know: why you should be building platforms, and
the core pillars that make up the “what” of platform engineering. However,
we encourage you to stick with us, because many people don’t get it like
you do. These chapters will support you in explaining platform engineering
to your colleagues, your boss, and your team, when you’re faced with
questions like: What is the motivation for doing it? What are the problems
we could be solving with platform engineering? And what does our team
need to focus on to do it well?
We start this book with the “why” not only to lay out the reasons we think
you should care about building platforms but also to share our motivation
for writing the book. We are passionate about solving these problems, and
we want to see more of you inspired to solve them as well. Platforms are

-- 22 of 630 --

born from the struggles of modern scaled software engineering: the
incredible demands we place on teams to manage a vast ecosystem
undergoing rapid change, without sacrificing the availability and
performance of their applications. This doesn’t mean that platform
engineering can solve all of our problems, but we explain why it is the right
approach in the face of this complexity, building on the lessons learned
from software trends including Agile, DevOps, site reliability engineering,
and product management.
Staying high-level, Chapter 2 describes our core pillars for a successful
platform engineering approach. Platform engineering is a bigger shift than
just putting some people on a team and giving them the responsibility of
solving for the “why.” These people also need to appreciate and operate
within the foundations of platform engineering: product, software, breadth,
and operations. The later chapters are written with the assumption that you
have a platform engineering team in place that approaches the problem
through these foundations.

-- 23 of 630 --

Chapter 1. Why Platform Engineering Is
Becoming Essential
She swallowed the cat to catch the bird, she swallowed the bird to
catch the spider, she swallowed the spider to catch the fly; I don’t
know why she swallowed a fly—Perhaps she’ll die!
—Nursery rhyme
Over the past 25 years, software organizations have experienced a problem:
what to do with all of the code, tools, and infrastructure that is shared
among multiple teams? In reaching for a solution, most have tried creating
central teams to take responsibility for these shared demands.
Unfortunately, in most cases this has not worked particularly well. Common
criticisms have been that central teams provide offerings that are hard to
use, they ignore customer needs in favor of their own priorities, their
systems aren’t stable enough, and sometimes all of the above.
Instead of fixing these central teams, some have tried getting rid of them
entirely, giving each application team access to the cloud and their choice of
open source software (OSS). However, this exposes those application teams
to the operational and maintenance complexity of their choices, so instead
of creating efficiencies and economies of scale, even small teams end up
needing site reliability engineering and DevOps specialists. And even with

-- 24 of 630 --

these dedicated specialists, the cost of managing the complexity continues
to threaten the productivity of the application teams.
Others, while embracing the best of the cloud and OSS, have not given up
on central teams; they’ve stuck with the model, certain that the benefits
outweigh the downsides. The best have succeeded by building platforms:
developing shared offerings that other engineers can comfortably build on
top of. They have become experts at managing the complexity of the cloud
and OSS while presenting stability to their users, and they are willing to
listen to and partner with the application teams to continually evolve and
meet the company’s needs. Whether or not they’ve called their efforts
platform engineering, they embody the mindset, skills, and approach
necessary for solving the problem of ever-growing complexity (the fly)
without swallowing ever-larger animals in the process.
To set the stage, in this chapter we’ll cover:
What we mean by platforms, and a few other important terms we’ll use
throughout the book
How system complexity has gotten worse in the era of cloud computing
and OSS, leaving us in an “over-general swamp” of exposed complexity
How platform engineering manages this complexity and so frees us from
the swamp

-- 25 of 630 --

This chapter has a slight emphasis on infrastructure and developer tooling,
but don’t worry, this book isn’t just for people working on infrastructure or
developer platforms! We’ll use systems common to all developers to
provide a tangible illustration of the current state of affairs, but the
underlying challenge of managing complexity is common to all kinds of
internal platform development.
Defining “Platform” and Other Important
Terms
Before we get started, let’s define several important terms we’ll be using
throughout this book, so we all have the same frame of reference:
Platform
We use Evan Bottcher’s definition from 2018, with a couple of terms
updated. A platform is a foundation of self-service APIs, tools,
services, knowledge, and support that are arranged as a compelling
internal product. Autonomous application teams can make use of
the platform to deliver product features at a higher pace, with
reduced coordination.
A corollary here is to ask: what, then, isn’t a platform? Well, for the
purposes of this book, a platform requires you to be doing platform
engineering. So, a wiki page isn’t a platform, because there’s no
1

-- 26 of 630 --

engineering to be done. “The cloud” also is not a platform by itself;
you can bring cloud products together to create an internal platform,
but on its own the cloud is an overwhelming array of offerings that is
too large to be seen as a coherent platform.
Platform engineering
Platform engineering is the discipline of developing and operating
platforms. The goal of this discipline is to manage overall system
complexity in order to deliver leverage to the business. It does this
by taking a curated product approach to developing platforms as
software-based abstractions that serve a broad base of application
developers, operating them as foundations of the business. We will
elaborate on this in Chapter 2.
Leverage
Core to the value of platform engineering is the concept of leverage
—meaning, the work of a few engineers on a platform team reduces
the work of the greater organization. Platforms achieve leverage in
two ways: making applications engineers more productive as they go
about their jobs creating business value, and making the engineering
organization more efficient by eliminating duplicate work across
application engineering teams.
Product

-- 27 of 630 --

We believe that it is essential to view a platform as a product.
Developing platforms as compelling products means that we take a
customer-centric approach when deciding on the features of a
platform. This implies a core focus on the users, but it requires more
than just performatively hiring product managers and calling it a day.
With the word “product” we strive to achieve for platforms what
Steve Jobs created with Apple products: against a broad range of
demand for features the product is deliberately and tastefully curated,
both through what it does and, more importantly, through what it
leaves out.
The Over-General Swamp
There are many types of internal platforms, and the advice in this book is
relevant to all of them. However, we see the most acute pain today in the
infrastructure and developer tooling (DevTools) spaces, and we see this
driving the most demand for platform engineering. That is because these
systems are the ones most closely integrated with the public cloud and OSS.
These two trends have driven a lot of industry change over the last 25 years,
but rather than making things uniformly better, they are increasing the
ownership costs of systems over time. They make applications easier to
build but harder to maintain, and the more your system grows, the slower
you get—like you’re walking through a swamp.

-- 28 of 630 --

This comes back to the economic realities of writing and maintaining
software. You might believe that the major cost of software is associated
with the act of writing it. In fact, most of the cost is related to its upkeep,
support, and maintenance. Estimates suggest that at least 60–75% of the
lifetime cost of software accrues after initial development, with about a
quarter of that dedicated purely to migrations and other “adaptive”
maintenance. Between required upgrades for security patches, retesting of
the software, migrations to new versions of underlying dependencies, and
everything else, software costs a lot of engineering time in maintenance
overhead.
Rather than reducing maintenance overhead, the cloud and OSS have
amplified this problem, because they provide an ever-growing layer of
primitives: general-purpose building blocks that provide broad capabilities
but are not integrated with one another. To function, they need “glue”—our
term for the integration code, one-off automation, configuration, and
management tools. While this glue holds everything together, it also creates
stickiness, making future changes much harder.
The over-general swamp forms as the glue spreads. Each application team
makes independent choices across the array of primitives, selecting those
that allow them to quickly build their own applications with the desired
cutting-edge capabilities. In their rush to deliver, they create whatever
custom glue is needed to hold everything together, and they’re rewarded
2
3
4

-- 29 of 630 --

with praise for shipping fast. As this repeats over time, the company ends
up with the type of architecture seen in Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-1. The over-general swamp, held together by glue
The problem with the swamp isn’t just the messy architecture diagram; it’s
how difficult it is to change that sticky mess over time. That’s important
because applications are constantly evolving, due to new features or
operational requirements. Every OSS and cloud primitive also undergoes
regular changes, and all of this requires updating the glue that binds them.
With the glue smeared everywhere, seemingly trivial updates to primitives
(say, a security patch) require extensive organization-wide engineering time
for integration and then testing, creating a massive tax on organizational
productivity.

-- 30 of 630 --

The key to avoiding this situation is to constrain how much glue there is,
which aligns with the old architectural principle of “more boxes, fewer
lines.” Platforms allow us to do this, and thus to extract ourselves from the
swamp. By abstracting over a limited set of OSS and vendor choices in an
opinionated manner, specific to your organizational needs, they enable
separation of concerns. You end up with an architecture more like Figure 1-
2.
Figure 1-2. How platforms reduce the amount of glue
In sum, platforms constrain the amount of glue needed by implementing the
concepts of abstraction and encapsulation and creating interfaces that
protect users from underlying complexity (including the complexity of an

-- 31 of 630 --

implementation that needs to change). These concepts are about as old as
computer science itself—but if they’re so well known, why does the
industry need platform engineering? To answer that question, we’ll start
with a look at how enterprise software engineering has changed over the
last quarter century.
How We Got Stuck in the Over-General
Swamp
The software industry has changed immensely over the past 25 years,
kicking off with the widespread use of the internet. For those of you who
have been in the industry for a while, we don’t need to tell you how much
this affected every aspect of software development, but for the relative
newcomers, it’s no exaggeration to say that the over-general swamp largely
exists due to the internet itself and the pressure to ship more, faster, without
failure. Let’s look at the key changes that led to us getting stuck here, and
the implications of that result.
Change #1: Explosion of Choice
The internet generated incredible demand for new software, and software
has to run on hardware, no matter what the name “serverless” might imply.
The initial wave was realized by provisioning a lot more hardware in data
centers, and this led to the growth of infrastructure engineering. Every

-- 32 of 630 --

company was buying a lot more servers and network gear, negotiating with
their data center providers, installing hardware in ever greater quantities all
across the world—big I infrastructure doing big E engineering powering the
big I internet.
We don’t want to minimize the challenges that were overcome in this
relatively short period of time. However, application developers interacting
with infrastructure teams were constantly frustrated by the extent of
hardware issues they had to deal with. They suffered from a limited but
constantly changing menu of server choices, frequent data center capacity
issues, and weird hardware-related operational problems that no one would
help debug—the common response was “nothing in the system logs, must
be your software.”
It’s no surprise that when the public cloud came along, frustrated
application developers were eager to jump over to a world where they could
call an API and seemingly control their own destiny. Despite reasonable
concerns about the architectural complexity, security risks, reliability, and
cost, even large, conservative companies were driven to some level of cloud
adoption.
Unfortunately, those reasonable concerns have proven not just valid, but
worse than feared. While the cloud promised platforms (PaaS) that would
make applications independent of infrastructure, what has seen wide

-- 33 of 630 --

adoption is IaaS, which in many cases has tied applications to infrastructure
even more than before. Reminding you of the difference:
With infrastructure as a service (IaaS), the vendor’s APIs are used to
provision a virtualized computing environment with various other
infrastructure primitives, which run an application more or less like it
would be run on physical hosts.
With platform as a service (PaaS), the vendor takes full ownership of
operating the application’s infrastructure, which means rather than
offering primitives, they offer higher-level abstractions so that the
application runs in a scalable sandbox.
Figure 1-3 shows a high-level comparison of the two approaches.

-- 34 of 630 --

Figure 1-3. Comparison of IaaS and PaaS models in terms of vendor versus customer responsibility
Initially, it was hoped that application teams would embrace fully supported
PaaS offerings—solutions as user-friendly as Heroku but capable of
handling greater complexity. Unfortunately, these platforms have struggled
to support a wide range of applications and to integrate with existing
applications and infrastructure. As a result, almost all companies doing in-
house software development at scale embrace IaaS to run that software,
preferring to accept the added complexity of provisioning and operating
their infrastructure in order to get the flexibility of choice.
The rise of the orchestration system Kubernetes is in many ways an
admission that both PaaS and IaaS have failed to meet enterprise needs. It is
5

-- 35 of 630 --

an attempt to simplify the IaaS ecosystem by forcing applications to be
“cloud native” and thus need less infrastructure-specific glue. However, for
as much as it standardizes, Kubernetes has not been a complexity win. As
an intermediary layer trying to support as many different types of compute
configurations as possible, it is a classic “leaky” abstraction, requiring far
too much detailed configuration to support each application correctly. Yes,
applications have more YAML glue and less Terraform glue, but as we’ve
discussed, a goal of platform engineering is to reduce the total amount of
glue.
Kubernetes is also an example of the second source of complexity we
mentioned. Matching the rise of the cloud has been the rise of OSS
ecosystems for all types of software. Where once you paid a vendor for
your development tools and middleware, now there are thriving and
evolving ecosystems for a wide array of development tools, libraries, and
even full independent systems like Kubernetes. The problem with OSS is
the proliferation of choice. Application teams with specific needs can
usually find an OSS solution that is optimal for them but not necessarily for
anyone else at the company. The bespoke choice that lets them quickly ship
their initial launch eventually turns into a burden, as they must
independently manage the maintenance costs that came with their “free, like
a puppy” OSS choice.
Change #2: Higher Operational Needs
6
7

-- 36 of 630 --

In parallel with this explosion of infrastructure primitives and applications
using them came the question of who was going to operate them, and how.
If you went back to the 1990s, before the internet took off, and looked at
how companies developed and operated their in-house software
applications, you would typically find two roles, which in most cases were
staffed in entirely separate teams:
Software developer
Responsible for architecture, coding, testing, etc., leading to software
applications being delivered as monolithic distributions, handed off
to someone else to operate
Systems administrator
Responsible for all aspects of the production operation of software
(in-house applications as well as vendor software and OSS) on the
company’s computers
As the internet took off and in-house software became more important to
companies’ success, these roles started to mutate. The importance of 24/7
operational support for an increasing number of applications initially led to
the growth of operations engineering teams, which tended to be filled with
a lot of early-career systems administrators—this was the proving ground
they had to face before graduating into a less operational role.

-- 37 of 630 --

You still see pockets of operations engineering in companies today, but the
role is declining. As the 2000s progressed, software developers adopted the
“Agile” model of regular releases of incremental functionality, as a better
way to get feedback and so ship a better product. Agile brought a challenge
to the operations engineering model: with one team taking on all the
responsibility for making code changes and pushing for fast release cycles
and the other team taking on all the frontline responsibilities when the code
had problems, there was some tension. As anyone who lived through it
knows, “some tension” is putting it mildly; particularly after an outage
caused by something that had been “thrown over the fence,” there was
usually a large amount of finger-pointing about which side was to blame.
The problem was that there was generally no clear answer, because Agile
had blurred the lines of responsibility.
This led to the creation and broad adoption of what the industry now calls
DevOps. DevOps was framed as a model to integrate application
development and operations activities, and it became associated as much
with a culture change as a set of specific technologies or roles to adopt.
That being said, the operational work didn’t go away, and on the ground
teams implemented it in two different ways:
Split
Keep the separation between operations and development teams, but
have the operations team do some amount of development,
particularly around creating glue for pushing code to production and

-- 38 of 630 --

integrating it with infrastructure. Thus, the old operations team with
operations engineers was now the DevOps team with DevOps
engineers.
Merged
Merge the operations and development teams into one. With this
approach, described as “you build it, you run it,” everyone who
works on a system is on the same team, with all of them sharing in
the operational work (the most salient aspect being part of the on-call
rotation). While many teams succeeded with 100% software
developers, others were more cross-functional, with specialists to
own the glue that pushed code to production and integrated with
infrastructure. At some companies, these engineers were also called
DevOps engineers.
In an act of parallel evolution, in about 2004 Google moved away from
operations engineering toward something they called site reliability
engineering (SRE). In 2015, during the upswing of DevOps popularity,
Google published a book on its practices, Site Reliability Engineering: How
Google Runs Production Systems (O’Reilly). This caused a lot of
excitement, because while many companies had been adopting DevOps,
plenty were struggling with the practical complexities of making it work.
With its heavy emphasis on reliability-oriented processes and organizational
responsibilities, some thought SRE was the silver bullet the industry needed
8

-- 39 of 630 --

to finally balance operational and development needs, enabling the creation
of much more reliable systems.
We would argue that SRE, as it was originally sold, has not been a
widespread success outside of Google. The processes were too
heavyweight; their success relied too much on the specific cultural capital
and organizational focus that came from Google being the world’s biggest
search company. This was well summarized by former director of SRE at
Google, Dave O’Connor, who after a couple of stints outside Google wrote
a post in 2023 titled “6 Reasons You Don’t Need an SRE Team” that
concludes, “The next stage in removing our production training wheels as
an industry is to tear down the fence between SRE and Product
Engineering, and make rational investments in reliability as a mindset,
based on specific needs.”
There is no getting away from the needs of operating software. Every
company that offers online software systems must have operational support
for this software during applicable usage times (which may be working
hours, 24/7, or somewhere in between). But how do you manage this in the
most cost-effective yet sustainable way possible? You want to limit the
places where you must have dedicated operations teams (or, using the
terminology introduced earlier, “split” DevOps/SRE teams) and make it as
easy as possible for the developers of the software to deploy and operate it
themselves, achieving the initial vision of DevOps.

-- 40 of 630 --

Result: Drowning in the Swamp
So you’ve got more application teams, making more choices, over a more
complex set of underlying OSS and cloud primitives. Application teams get
into this situation because they want to deliver quickly, and using the best
systems of the day that fit the problem (or the systems they know best) will
help them do that. Plus, if they’ve gotta own all the operational
responsibility for this system themselves, they might as well pick their own
poison!
Add to this that application engineers with new features are not the only
ones wanting to ship as quickly as possible. The increasing surface of
internet-accessible systems has led to an escalation of cyberattacks and
vulnerability discoveries, which in turn means that infrastructure and OSS
are changing faster to address these risks. We’ve seen upgrade cycles for
systems and components move from years to months, and these changes
mean work for application teams who must update their glue and retest or
even migrate their software in response.
The pressure for change has created a swampy mess of glue mixed with the
long-term consequences of individual team decisions. Every new greenfield
project adds more choices and glue to this bog of complexity, and over time
your developers get stuck in the mire. It’s hard to navigate, slow to move
through, and full of hungry operational alligators (or worse, crocs!). How
do you extract yourself from this morass? It’s no surprise that we think the

-- 41 of 630 --

answer is platform engineering, and next we will cover the ways in which it
helps you do just that.
How Platform Engineering Clears the
Swamp
If you’ve been stuck in the over-general swamp, you can appreciate the
intellectual appeal of platform engineering. You’re hiring more people in
roles like infrastructure, DevTools, DevOps, and SRE engineer, but you
never seem able to keep up with the new complexity arising from OSS and
cloud systems. Your applications grow more complex, your application
developers become less productive, and you need a way out. Building
platforms to manage this complexity sounds great.
But building platforms takes significant investment. This includes the costs
to build and support them, as well as the overhead associated with limiting
application teams’ choices of OSS and cloud primitives. Additionally,
establishing a platform engineering team can incur organizational costs
through reorganizations, role changes, and the overhead of rolling out a new
focus area for the company. In this section, we explain how platforms and
platform engineering will justify these investments and deliver long-term
value.
Limiting Primitives While Minimizing Overhead

-- 42 of 630 --

The explosion of choice wasn’t all bad: greenfield applications can ship
much faster now than in the past, and application developers feel more
autonomy and ownership when they have systems they enjoy using. These
benefits often get forgotten when companies start to focus on reducing the
support burden and long-term costs that arise from the diversity of choices.
In this situation, the first instinct of leadership is to prescribe a set of
standards using appeals to authority. “Because I am the expert in
databases,” they say, “I will choose which databases you, the application
teams, can use.” Or, “I am the architect, so I decide on all of the software
tools and packages.” Or, “I am the CTO, so I decide everything.” Inevitably,
these experts will struggle to understand the business needs well enough to
make optimal choices, and application teams will suffer. Standardization via
authority isn’t enough.
Platform engineering recognizes that modern engineering teams should
have systems that they enjoy using, provided by teams that are responsive
to them as customers and not just focused on cost reduction or their own
support burden. Instead of prescribing a set of standards based on appeals to
authority, platform engineering takes a customer-focused product approach
that curates a small set of primitives able to meet a broad range of
requirements. This requires compromises in light of business realities,
incremental delivery of good platform architecture, and a willingness to
partner directly with application teams and listen to what they need. When
done well, you can point to the demonstrated leverage of partnering to use
the platform-provided offerings instead of appealing to the authority of the

-- 43 of 630 --

architect, database administrator, CTO, or platform VP. In this way, you can
reduce the number of OSS and cloud primitives used, without the worst
consequences of top-down mandates.
Reducing Per-Application Glue
On top of reducing the number of primitives in use, platform engineering
aims to go one step further and reduce the coupling “glue” to those that
remain. This removes most of the application-level glue, by abstracting the
primitives into systemic platform capabilities that are able to meet broader
needs. To illustrate this, we’ll dive into the common challenge of managing
Terraform.
OSS and cloud offerings are complex in a lot of ways, with one of the most
costly ways being their configuration—the endless lists of parameters that,
if not specified correctly, will eventually lead to issues in production.
Nowhere is this more of a problem than in cloud configuration, for which
the 2024 state-of-the-art tool is an OSS infrastructure as code (IaC) system
called Terraform that provides a perfect illustration of how platform
engineering addresses the downsides of glue.
When application engineering teams all started pushing hard for the
smorgasbord of the IaaS cloud, most companies decided that the path of
least friction was to give each team the power and responsibility to
provision their own individual cloud infrastructure with their own

-- 44 of 630 --

configuration. In practice, that meant they became part-time cloud
engineering teams, versed in configuration management and infrastructure
provisioning. If you want infrastructure that is repeatable, rebuildable, and
can be secured and validated, you need a configuration management and
provisioning template like Terraform. So, the common approach was to
have application development teams learn Terraform. In our experience,
this led to the following progression:
1. Most engineers don’t want to learn a whole new toolset for infrequent
tasks. Infrastructure setup and provisioning are not an everyday core
focus—not even for teams doing mature resiliency testing and regularly
rebuilding the system from scratch. So, over time the work would get
shunted either to unsuspecting new hires, or to the rare engineers who
were interested in DevOps. In the best case this would lead to one or two
people evolving into infrastructure provisioning experts who could write
Terraform and own all of this for the team. However, most of the time
these engineers didn’t stick around on application teams for long, which
pushed the work back onto new hires, who usually made a mess of it.
2. The shortage, combined with people cobbling together their own
Terraform all over the company, often led leadership to centralize the
work across multiple teams (or even the whole company). But rather
than centralizing with the goal of building a platform, all the Terraform
engineers were just pulled into a team that provided Terraform-writing
services.

-- 45 of 630 --

3. These centralized Terraform-writing teams became trapped in a feature
shop mindset, taking in work requests and pumping them out. This
meant no strong developers (the type that can change the structure of the
Terraform to provide better abstractions) wanted to be part of it. Over
time, the codebase devolved into a spaghetti mess, which slowed down
application teams who wanted something slightly out of the norm and
eventually created a security nightmare.
A better path is to realize that you need to do something more coherent than
offer centralized Terraform-writing support, and think about how to evolve
this group of experts from a “glue” maintenance center into an engineering
center that builds things—namely, a platform. This will require you to go
one level deeper in understanding your customers’ needs, to develop
opinions about which solutions to offer rather than just trying to make it
easier for people to get access to whatever they want, and to think about
what you can build that takes you beyond just the provisioning step.
As you move into new models for providing underlying infrastructure, it is
important to centralize expertise and create efficiencies. Instead of each
engineering team hiring their own DevOps and SRE engineers to support
the infrastructure, a platform team can pool these experts and expand their
remit to identifying broader solutions for the company. This not only
supports the one-off changes but permits their expertise to be leveraged to
create platforms that abstract the underlying complexity. This is where the
magic starts to happen.

-- 46 of 630 --

Centralizing the Cost of Migrations
We will mention migrations often in this book, as we believe managing
migrations is an important part of a platform’s value. Applications and
primitives have long but independent lifetimes, during which they each
undergo many changes. The combination of these changes creates high
maintenance costs. Platform engineering reduces these costs by:
Reducing the diversity of OSS and cloud systems in use
The fewer primitives you have, the less likely it is that you’ll need to
do a migration because of one.
Encapsulating OSS and vendor systems with APIs
While platform APIs are often imperfect at encapsulating all aspects
of the OSS and vendor systems they leverage, even “good enough”
APIs that abstract a lot of their implementation will allow the
platform to protect its applications from needing to change when the
underlying systems change.
Creating observability of platform usage
Platforms can provide various mechanisms to standardize collection
of metadata around both their own use and that of underlying OSS
and vendor systems. This visibility into the dependency state of the

-- 47 of 630 --

applications using your platform should allow you to ease the burden
of upgrades when those dependencies need to change.
Giving ownership of OSS and cloud systems to teams with software
developers
When APIs are later shown to be imperfect, unlike traditional
infrastructure organizations, platform teams have software
developers who can write the nontrivial migration tooling that makes
the migration transparent to most application teams.
Allowing Application Developers to Operate What
They Develop
The goal of mature DevOps was to simplify accountability through a “you
build it, you own it” approach. Despite this having been a popular idea for
over a decade, many companies have not managed to execute on this
model. We believe that, for those that have succeeded, a major contributor
to this success is the leverage that their platforms provide through
abstracting the operational complexity of underlying dependencies.
No one loves being on call. But when teams are only on call for issues
caused by their own applications, we have found that a surprising number
are willing to take on operational responsibility. After all, why wouldn’t
they stand behind the business-critical systems they spend their days
creating? For too many companies, however, the operational problems

-- 48 of 630 --

caused by the infrastructure, OSS, and its glue completely dominate the
problems in the application code itself.
An example of this can be seen as applications seeking higher resiliency are
deployed across multiple availability zones, cloud regions, or data centers.
This leaves application teams exposed to intermittent cloud provider issues
such as networking problems, and the 2 a.m. alerts that inevitably follow.
Platform engineering addresses this by building resilient abstractions that
can handle application failover on behalf of the application teams, reducing
the number of late-night wakeup calls they receive.
When most of the underlying systems’ operational complexity is hidden
behind platform abstractions, this complexity can be owned and operated by
your platform team. This requires you to limit the options that you support,
so that you can push the abstraction boundary upward into a core set of
offerings, each handling a broad set of application use cases. It also requires
that you have high operational standards within your platform team, so that
application teams are comfortable relying on them.
Yes, building and operating platforms that handle these issues is hard,
especially when it comes to getting application teams to accept limitations
on their choices. But the only alternatives are either directly exposing your
entire organization to these issues or perpetuating your use of operations
teams (by any name), and so in turn perpetuating the accountability
problems, negative impact on agile development, and finger-pointing.

-- 49 of 630 --

Empowering Teams to Focus on
Building Platforms
If you want to leverage OSS and vendor primitives but reduce the
complexity that slows progress later, you need teams that can build
platforms to manage those primitives and their complexity. There are four
platform-adjacent approaches that are popular today, all of which bring
valuable skills to the organization, but none of which are set up to have the
combination of focus and skills needed for building platforms. Table 1-1
summarizes these approaches and why they are not adapted to this task.

-- 50 of 630 --

Table 1-1. Platform-adjacent approaches and why they struggle to build platforms
Approach 	Focus Why they struggle to build
platforms
Infrastructure 	Robust
operation of
underlying
infrastructure
Little focus on abstracting
infrastructure to simplify applications,
particularly across multiple
infrastructure components
DevTools 	Developer
productivity
up to
production
delivery
Little focus on solving developer
productivity challenges related to
systems in production running on
complex infrastructure
DevOps 	Application
delivery to
production
Little focus on ensuring their
automation/tools help the widest
possible audience
SRE 	System
reliability
Little focus on systemic issues other
than reliability, often delivering
impact through organizational
practices instead of developing better
systems

-- 51 of 630 --

Individuals from each of these backgrounds might assert that they
personally want to build more platforms rather than glue, but their
organization won’t let them. We empathize; we are not describing
individuals, but rather how these approaches have evolved within
organizations and how organizations typically define the respective teams’
missions. However, the problem remains—individuals’ roles are limited by
the mission of their team, and changing a team’s mission is not easy when
the greater organization expects it to just do what it always has done.
Platform engineering asks each of these groups of engineers to come out of
their silos and work in teams with a broader mission to create platforms that
provide balance. This involves:
For infrastructure teams, balancing infrastructure capabilities with
developer-centered simplicity
For DevTools teams, balancing development experience with production
support experience
For DevOps teams, balancing optimal per-application glue with more
general software to support a lot more applications
For SRE teams, balancing reliability with other system attributes like
feature agility, cost efficiency, security, and performance
As a deliberate reset of organizational expectations, platform engineering
gives you the ability to create teams that focus on building the technologies
to finally clear the swamp.

-- 52 of 630 --



-- 53 of 630 --

DO PLATFORMS SUPPORT INNOVATION?
As you’re hopefully starting to see, platforms can cure all kinds of
developer pain points, make your systems faster and more secure, make
your developers more productive, deal with migrations automatically, and
shorten the feedback loops for getting things done. And while we recognize
that it can take quite some time to achieve all of these outcomes, we believe
that this is an ideal worth striving for.
But what about the other good things that a platform might do? We’re
engineers, after all, so it’s natural to expect our platforms to also support
innovation and experimentation, because we know that innovation is the
growth engine of our companies. Indeed, they can, but we want to clarify
what this means, because platforms can get in the way of innovation and
experimentation as much as they can support it.
If we are speaking purely of business innovation that can be developed
within the context of the existing technology offerings, yes, platforms
support that innovation. After all, by making application developers more
productive, and in particular enabling them to push new features to
production safely (such as through the use of feature flags and A/B testing),
platforms allow them to build more faster, and thus support rapid
experimentation with business ideas using the existing technology.
However, there will always be innovations that the platform by its nature
does not support, and even fights against. Most significant innovation

-- 54 of 630 --

involving technology is going to require tools that don’t exist yet in the
company to be brought to bear on a problem. The data space is a great
example, because it moves so quickly. You may have an excellent platform
that supports easy access to relational databases and enables most of the
engineers at the company to do their jobs well. But if a team realizes they
need a storage option with very different performance characteristics than
your relational database offering in order to power a new, innovative
business opportunity, they are going to leave your platform, at least
partially, to build out this idea. If and when it comes to fruition, you may
find that the new storage system is a good thing to pull into the platform
offerings—but the innovation here is not enabled by the platform! That
doesn’t mean you should try to cram every new idea into the platform;
rather, the best path is often to let these ideas develop independently, then
merge in only those that are successful and have widespread demand.
It’s tempting for platform teams to seek to quash innovation and
experimentation that would take people off the platform. Much of the time,
these ideas are a waste of engineering effort, driven by the “not invented
here” bias that drives software engineers everywhere to build and create
their own solutions to problems. But in some cases, these teams are right
that they need to do something outside of the norm. If the platform team
fights against all exceptions to using their offerings, or insists that they be
the ones to build all new offerings that the teams might need, they not only
push their systems to be too general but also risk inhibiting healthy
innovation along the way.

-- 55 of 630 --

So, yes, your platform should support easy experimentation and innovation
within the bounds of the known, by making developers more productive
and focused on the application layer. But you will not be the be-all, end-all
support of innovation, and in fact, if you want to support innovation, you’ll
need to let some teams go their own way for a while to prove out new ideas.
Making smart choices about when to push people toward central offerings
and when to let them spin out their own alternative “shadow platforms” is
a key skill for platform engineering leaders, and one we will discuss more
in Chapter 10.
Wrapping Up
We’re on a complexity collision course, and many of us are already hitting
the wall. Whether it’s with the challenge of making DevOps effective,
dealing with a million snowflake decisions, managing the increasing
complexity of infrastructure as code, or simply dealing with the required
upgrades and migrations that come with all software products, we need
help. This is the reason that we believe platform engineering is becoming
more and more important for the industry. By combining a product mindset
with software and systems engineering expertise, you can build platforms
that give you the leverage to manage this complexity for your company.
9

-- 56 of 630 --

We’ll sometimes call these teams your “users” or “customers,” if it makes more sense in the context.
For a good diagram of the software lifecycle, see https://oreil.ly/iDM5u.
See Jussi Koskinen’s paper on software maintenance costs at https://oreil.ly/EFNZ6.
This is literally what they were called in the 2003 AWS vision document (see https://oreil.ly/n4ie_).
Other full service PaaSes that failed to see broad success were Force.com, AWS Elastic Beanstalk,
and Google AppEngine. As a result, vendors often use the term PaaS for more flexible offerings,
which means they need to be combined with other IaaS and so have similar problems around
complexity.
We will discuss what this looks like in Chapter 2.
As per former Sun Microsystems CEO Scott McNealy, alluding to the long-term cost of adopting
either OSS or puppies.
In other companies, they were called systems engineers or systems development engineers.
This is the platform equivalent of “shadow IT”—systems deployed by departments other than the
central department, to fill gaps or bypass limitations and restrictions that have been imposed by
central systems.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

-- 57 of 630 --

Chapter 2. The Pillars of Platform
Engineering
The carrying power of a bridge is not the average strength of the
pillars, but the strength of the weakest pillar.
—Zygmunt Bauman
Now that we’ve talked about the “why” of platform engineering, let’s talk
about the “what.” Remember the initial definition we gave in Chapter 1:
Platform engineering is the discipline of developing and operating
platforms. The goal of this discipline is to manage overall system
complexity in order to deliver leverage to the business. It does this by
taking a curated product approach to developing platforms as
software-based abstractions that serve a broad base of application
developers, operating them as foundations of the business.
From this definition, we can identify the four pillars of platform
engineering practice:
Product
Taking a curated product approach
Development

-- 58 of 630 --

Developing software-based abstractions
Breadth
Serving a broad base of application developers
Operations
Operating as foundations for the business
These four pillars are critical to platform engineering success. Without
them, you end up pushing the complexity around, but not actually managing
it. Approaches that have come before have not managed to square this
circle. This is not surprising, because building good platforms is hard!
That’s precisely why we wrote this book. In this chapter, we’ll outline why
we view these as the pillars of platform engineering, and what they look
like in terms of underpinnings.
Taking a Curated Product Approach
The first pillar of platform engineering is the curated product approach that
balances the concerns of the other three. By product approach, we mean
getting out of a purely technical mindset and refocusing on what your
customers need from your systems, and their experience using these
systems. By curated approach, we mean not just that there are specific
interaction patterns and usage conventions, but that you have an opinion

-- 59 of 630 --

about what is and is not in scope for this platform and curate the offering
accordingly.
This is why we say curated product approach, rather than just curated
approach or product approach—because either of these applied without the
other is insufficient to create successful platform teams. A product approach
without curation leads to great customer responsiveness but no coherent
strategy, turning your teams into service centers. And curation imposed
without a product mindset creates rigid offerings for application teams that
may not meet their actual needs.
A successful curated product approach leads to two distinct types of
platform products:
Paved paths
The most common type of curated platform layers multiple offerings
together into easy-to-use workflows, sometimes described as “paved
paths” (see Figure 2-1). These platforms build on top of the work
that good infrastructure organizations do in curation of offerings to
make these offerings work well together. Product success comes
from hiding most of the complexity of these common multisystem
workflows from your application teams. This is a coverage play with
a usability angle—you want to be opinionated enough to cover (and
encourage) common uses, perhaps following the Pareto principle to
identify the 20% of use cases that will cover 80% of needs, and focus

-- 60 of 630 --

on making these work extremely well. This also means saying no to
outliers; this is a paved path, not a forced offering, and those with
outlier needs can step off it at will.
Figure 2-1. Architecture of a paved path platform
Railways
The second type of curated platform looks very different from the
paved path type. In this case, you have discovered a meaningful gap
that is not covered by any existing product but that would fill a need
for many application teams. These platforms are the result of a
product discovery process that looks for patterns of need across
application teams and then investigates how teams are working
around this missing platform.

-- 61 of 630 --

They’re often based on prototypes application teams have built to
meet their specific needs, which are then generalized to create a more
broadly useful offering. But the goal of creating this type of platform
isn’t just to smooth out common processes, and it often involves a
major infrastructure investment to bring a specific piece of
functionality into the company. We call these platforms “railways”
(see Figure 2-2). Some railways we’ve built include a batch job
platform, a notifications system, and a global application
configuration platform.
Figure 2-2. Architecture of a railway platform
That said, taking a product approach to building platforms involves much
more than thinking about the user experience and identifying obvious gaps.
It requires adopting a customer-focused mindset throughout your team, in
everything you build. It means thinking deeply about what would make
your customers’ lives better, and going beyond making things easier by
considering what work you can take off their hands entirely.

-- 62 of 630 --

Developing Software-Based Abstractions
If you aren’t building software, you aren’t doing platform engineering.
The most common form of platform engineering today doesn’t happen at
the infrastructure or developer tooling level; it happens within larger
software organizations that have multiple product lines. These product lines
typically have core capabilities that are built in-house and that should be
shared across all of them: billing systems are a common example. The
natural thing to do is to pull these out and offer them as a platform, so that a
single team can support them across multiple product lines. Obviously, this
team will include software engineers, as the platform’s components will
have been built in-house as the company grew; software engineers created
these systems, and they are core to keeping them going. The platform may
evolve to integrate SaaS products with the in-house logic, but the idea that
you would run such a team without any software development capability is
silly.
We believe that this is true of all platform engineering teams, and not just
the ones responsible for platforms that were spun out of bespoke in-house
systems. As a corollary, if you don’t need to write software yet, you may
not be ready to embark on “platform engineering.” If a wiki with pointers to
the approved cloud provider offerings and instructions on how to onboard is
a sufficient platform investment for your engineering team today, that’s

-- 63 of 630 --

great! It’s not what we consider “platform engineering,” but for your
company, or for the particular problem at hand, it might not be time to
invest in a platform engineering team to solve these problems.
If you are starting a platform engineering initiative, be careful about doing
so without involving software engineers from the get-go. Whether you’re
offering an internal billing platform or an infrastructure-level compute
platform, platform engineering creates leverage by using software logic
developed in-house to abstract underlying systems. Put another way:
without that abstraction, you are not creating platforms that manage
complexity; you are vending infrastructure and passing all the complexity
on to users.
To provide pointers to what these engineers might build, we’ll walk through
some of the abstractions you are likely to need as part of your platform.
This includes the platform service and its APIs, as well as thick clients,
OSS customizations, and integrations with metadata services.
The Major Abstractions: Platform Service and Its
APIs
Yes, this is straight from microservices or service-oriented architecture
(SOA), which we assume you, like everyone in the industry, are familiar
with in 2024. To cover the basics, the service is a major component of a
platform; it implements the logic to coordinate the behavior of underlying

-- 64 of 630 --

OSS, vendor, and in-house systems, presenting abstract APIs for application
systems to use (see Figure 2-3). To add some detail, a single platform may
split its implementation into multiple service components. Further, the
“API” need not be a traditional synchronous request/response; there may be
queueing on either side, or the platform service may send messages to
applications that are completely removed from a specific request.
Figure 2-3. Architecture of the service and API components of a platform
The service and its APIs are an important part of platforms, and they’re the
reason it’s essential to have software engineers involved from the start.
Without them, it is very hard to create the abstractions over complexity that
make things simpler for the applications and their engineers.
As important as APIs are, we do have a warning, particularly for
infrastructure platforms. Those coming from a purely software background
tend to believe an API and its service need to encapsulate the underlying
OSS, vendor, and in-house systems. For example, we have seen platform
teams propose that when the core of their platform is an OSS system such

-- 65 of 630 --

as PostgreSQL, the only way they can control their fate with regard to
changes and migrations is by creating an API layer that fully encapsulates
it, so that clients now need to send API requests, rather than SQL.
The key test of whether full encapsulation is the right level of abstraction is
to look at it through the eyes of the application engineers—by reducing the
surface area and divorcing them from resources associated with the
underlying OSS and vendor systems (including things like their public
documentation), have you made their productivity higher, or have you just
made things easier for the platform team to manage? Until you are sure of
the former, it’s better to allow direct access to the underlying systems and
learn from them, rather than imposing an API where your users are
divorced from the wider ecosystem. Figure 2-4 shows an architecture where
most platform dependencies have been encapsulated, but one has been left
exposed.
Figure 2-4. Architecture of a platform that avoids full encapsulation

-- 66 of 630 --

Thick Clients
A follow-on to the previous section is that applications are often best served
by client-side code being more complex than the “thin shims” of pure
service architectures. This can take the form of thick client libraries (as in
Figure 2-5) or actual executable binaries, which used to be called
“daemons” and are often now called “sidecars.” There are sometimes
significant benefits to having rich logic in the client, such as reliability and
performance enhancements around sharding, local caching, and load
balancing. This is particularly the case when supporting legacy
applications; for example, we have seen any number of storage platforms
have to implement FUSE mounts as a way of presenting themselves as a
normal filesystem for legacy users.
Figure 2-5. Architecture of the thick client component of a platform
As platform software now runs within the customer’s application, thick
clients come with significant costs related to observability, debugging, and
1

-- 67 of 630 --

the upgrade cycle not being controlled by the platform team. Thus, when it
comes to complex logic, such as coordinating multiple underlying services,
we much prefer putting it in the service. But we have also seen too many
teams dismiss the possibility of a thicker client for reasons of architectural
or operational purity, without considering the trade-offs and whether it is
the best abstraction for their platform’s users.
OSS Customizations
In some cases, OSS is very close to providing the abstractions that
application engineers need, and it just requires some amount of
customization to the specific problems your company faces. Sometimes
these take the form of plug-ins to the OSS, and the platform team builds
those plug-ins and operates the overall system. Other times, the platform
team is forced to customize the OSS in order to meet a specific business
demand. You may end up becoming contributors to or leaders of the OSS
project itself as part of this customization, or you may just create a fork for
your company. The ability to work within and modify the OSS code itself is
part of the value-add of platform engineering.
Integrating Metadata Registries
We want to focus on this particular integration as it is a constant topic in
discussions around platform engineering, to the point that some insist it is
the core of platform engineering. As we’ve mentioned, one of the

-- 68 of 630 --

opportunities platform engineering affords is the ability to deal with
problems and changes in the underlying OSS and cloud primitives on behalf
of your users. However, to do this you need to have metadata about each
primitive that makes it possible to reason about what each one is being used
for, and by whom. Some examples of the questions platform teams might
need to answer are:
Ownership
Who owns this service?
Access control
Does this service need to have such broad access to this blob store
bucket?
Cost efficiency
Which organization should be charged for this blob store use?
Migrations
What teams are using the blob store in a nonstandard way, and who
will we have to talk to about how we shim them as we migrate to a
different vendor?
We’re seeing a few different types of systems emerge to keep track of this
information. These include:

-- 69 of 630 --

Tag management systems
All major cloud providers and observability platforms now provide
ways to “tag” individual resources with metadata. They are also
starting to provide management tools that allow platform teams to
enforce schemas and run rich exploration queries.
API/schema registries
These are focused on collating compile-time information about
platform and application APIs, gathering the relevant information
into one place for management, governance, and exploration.
Internal developer portals (IDPs)
These take registries one step further, offering a centralized catalog
for not just API and resource metadata, but platform configuration as
well. A key aspect is a programmable UI that allows each platform
team to “plug in” their offering, creating a consistent, centralized
user experience across all platforms.
There are some companies claiming great success with each approach, but
it’s early to say how this will all play out. We’ve seen registries struggle to
get off the ground when the teams that created them thought of them as
something users would manually populate, or that they would “just” need to
clean up after machine scraping. We’re confident that broad success will
depend on how well platforms can integrate into these registries to

-- 70 of 630 --

automatically capture and label the metadata on an ongoing basis. There is
nothing engineers like less than being curators.

-- 71 of 630 --

IS AN IDP A REQUIRED COMPONENT OF A PLATFORM ENGINEERING
OFFERING?
As we write this in 2024, there is a fair bit of noise about internal developer
portals, with many claiming not only that they are a core component of a
platform (sometimes in this context called internal developer platforms,
with a common acronym that confuses), but also that they are the most
important component of the strategy, to the point of being required.
We are not opposed to such systems. Having one place that ties together
ownership of platform resources with all your platform’s self-service UIs
and documentation may well be exactly the high-leverage thing your
customers need today. Equally, it may not be. Integrating the majority of
platform use cases that would make it worthwhile is going to be a lot of
work, and arguing “look at what the shiny UI could do someday” is not
going to reduce that work.
If your customers are saying that one of their biggest problems is figuring
out where to go to find the right UI or documentation to use the platform,
then yes, bring in an IDP. However, if that’s further down on their list of
asks, then we’re happy to tell you that you can ignore standing up an IDP
for now, and instead just use tools like wikis for your documentation and
links to APIs. An IDP is not a requirement for building a great platform.

-- 72 of 630 --

Serving a Broad Base of Application
Developers
The target audience for platforms is application developers—and not just
one or two teams, but a broad base of teams. Sometimes application teams
struggle with the usability overheads of central platforms. If you’re used to
having direct access to a machine to install whatever you want, having to go
through a central platform that abstracts all of that from you can seem like a
burden. While the purpose of a platform isn’t to make every single action as
easy as it could be for expert users who want direct access to primitives,
platform teams need to invest in the things that offer the best development
and operational experience to all of its users.
That’s why we use the indefinite team “broad base.” In modern
microservices/SOA systems, a large number of teams build software with
abstractions and APIs that are called by multiple other teams. We don’t
think calling all such systems “platforms” is useful. However, as usage
broadens in terms of users and use cases, you need to move from just
developing features to also developing capabilities that make the system
cheaper, safer, and easier to use. These include:
Self-service interfaces
To scalably support a large set of customers, self-service is a key part
of a platform offering. If every new customer onboarding requires

-- 73 of 630 --

the platform team to do manual work, or worse, requires multiple
parts of the team to do manual and coordinated work, you will lose
your leverage. This means it’s essential to offer self-service access,
provisioning, and configuration. These may be set up as
graphical/web-based user interfaces or command-line tools, and they
often integrate into continuous integration/continuous delivery
(CI/CD) platforms (see Figure 2-6). The best platform offerings will
have an easy-to-use set of defaults for novice users but will also
provide the ability for power users to access the building blocks
themselves when needed for more advanced activities.
Figure 2-6. Architecture of the self-service components of a platform
User observability
A particular type of self-service that is less talked about but crucial
for platforms is user observability. This requires building the
telemetry to help developers debug their own problems throughout

-- 74 of 630 --

the full lifecycle of developing and operating applications that use
the platform. Tanya Reilly, senior principal engineer and author of
The Staff Engineer’s Path (O’Reilly), told us: “One of the goals we
ask our platform teams to aim for is that a user of the platform should
be able to tell whether they’re doing something wrong or the
platform is doing something wrong. Obviously that’s an ideal you
can never entirely reach, but it’s a good mindset.”
Guardrails
When serving a broad base of users, you cannot expect them all to be
experts in the underlying systems—particularly when they cross into
details like security, compliance, reliability, and cost controls. In all
these cases, a simple misconfiguration can turn out to be costly.
Thus, an important part of building a platform is implementing
guardrails, the protections and default limits that help ensure such
expensive misconfigurations are highly unlikely. Because the exact
requirements vary so much from company to company and over a
company’s lifetime, having an in-house platform that can react to the
changing demands in this space can provide a major advantage for
application developer productivity over time.
Multitenancy
A core aspect of broadly used platforms is that they are efficient only
if they are built to be multitenant—that is, they can support different

-- 75 of 630 --

applications within the same runtime components. In the case of a
hyperscaler cloud provider, this approach is used to support efficient
economics with respect to the underlying hardware. For your
platforms, the aim of multitenancy is more likely to be to support
efficient economics of engineering time—that is, instead of operating
one system per application, you can have a central team that provides
shared systems that support many applications (see Figure 2-7).
Figure 2-7. Architecture of a platform with hybrid multitenancy
A lot of hard engineering problems crop up when you start to offer
multitenancy. This is another reason why you need software and
system engineers on your platform teams. You may decide there are
certain components (or certain customers) for which it is better not to
be multitenant and choose a hybrid approach, but if you don’t
intermingle applications and/or users in at least some of the
components or deployments of your platform, it’s probably not a
platform.

-- 76 of 630 --

Operating as Foundations
The last pillar of platform engineering practice is that platforms need to be
operated as foundations—something rock-solid stable that application
engineers can trust their business on. When your platform is flaky, either
due to the underlying components or to your own code, you force your
customers to become experts in the platform’s operation. Not only is that
not providing leverage, it is doing it in the worst way possible, as the only
way customers will become experts is through the reactive experience of
the platform causing new operational issues.
Some companies approach platform engineering through a strong developer
experience focus, but then struggle with the operational side of things. As a
foundation supporting a growing number of different application needs, all
on top of external OSS and vendor systems beyond your complete control,
it takes a lot of work to avoid “operational hell,” where you are not able to
operate your platform at the quality level the business needs.
There are three major aspects to a platform being a foundation: taking
operational responsibility for the full platform, ensuring the platform is
supported, and being disciplined in operational practices. Let’s look at each
of these in turn.
Responsibility for the Full Platform

-- 77 of 630 --

Platform engineering teams must operate the full platform, not just the
software developed in-house (see Figure 2-8). When the other components
are pushed off to customers to operate themselves, you give up a lot of your
platform’s leverage. You may have built something that makes it easy for an
application team to get started, but as soon as they run into issues in
production, they will need to become experts in the underlying primitives
and in how the platform services are tying them together.
Figure 2-8. Architecture demonstrating how platform teams take full operational responsibility for all
components and dependencies
We have seen teams dodge operational responsibility around vendor and
OSS software, shipping their platforms in a few patterns that create
development-time leverage but give no operational-time leverage. These
include:
Provisioning platforms

-- 78 of 630 --

The platform provisions new instances of the OSS/vendor systems,
and the application team takes over operational responsibility after
provisioning.
Framework platforms
The platform collates OSS and vendor library versions, perhaps with
some in-house logic, but the application team owns all operational
responsibility.
Tools platforms
The platform provides tools and UIs that make it easier to manipulate
OSS and vendor systems, but the application team still owns all
operation responsibility for those systems.
We are all for provisioning, frameworks, and tools being part of a platform
engineering team’s remit, and there are certainly cases where it makes no
sense to invest beyond them at the time. However, because they expose so
much operational complexity to users, these narrow approaches scale badly,
and these efforts should not rightly be thought of as platform engineering.
Supporting the Platform
For many application teams, user support escalations are a rare problem. If
the application is for external customers, they usually have large support
engineering organizations and only see escalations that can be handled as

-- 79 of 630 --

operational issues. If it’s an internal service that’s not a platform, whether
because it has a limited number of users, breadth of use, and/or complexity,
those same characteristics usually mean that it won’t generate many support
cases either.
The situation is very different for platform teams. As we discussed earlier,
they should build in features like self-service interfaces, user observability,
guardrails, and multitenancy. But against a broad base of use cases, rarely
can these be implemented so well that the team can avoid a constant stream
of customer questions. These questions tend to be about a combination of
edge cases during onboarding and application-specific production issues,
whether caused by changes in or problems with the application, the
platform, or the underlying systems. Rarely are internal platform teams
large enough that they can justify hiring dedicated support specialists.
All of this means that user support is an important part of platform
engineering, not just in terms of support practices but also in terms of
creating a customer empathy culture across the entire team.
Operational Discipline
Operational discipline, by which we mean a focus on carrying out
operational practices on a routine basis, is an area that it’s easy for those
with an application software development background to overlook (or
worse, roll their eyes at). Some folks think the only reason systems people

-- 80 of 630 --

have to focus so hard on operational practices is that they didn’t build their
APIs right in the first place.
Now, it may be true that the APIs could have been better (although, as we
covered earlier in the chapter, there are costs to that). However, the bigger
issue is that it is difficult to operate a system whose major functionality
predominantly comes from someone else’s code—be it an OSS or vendor
system, or some other in-house system. This adds a level of complexity in
that unknown operational problems (the “unknown unknowns”) are a
constant threat, and the only way to manage that threat is with a discipline
that seeks to understand and address all anomalies early, before they cause
acute pain.
A large part of why infrastructure engineering–style cultures have
continued even at companies that would be better served by platforms is
that the software developers who would build such platforms don’t want to
engage with the practices needed to operate other peoples’ systems well.
Platform engineering teams need to be proactive in their use of operational
practices, understanding that they are a major part of ensuring that those
platforms are a foundation the company can rely on.

-- 81 of 630 --

WHAT DOES GENERATIVE AI MEAN FOR PLATFORM ENGINEERING?
If platform engineering has grown in popularity thanks to the combined
forces of DevOps/SRE, OSS, and the cloud, what might the latest iteration
of generative AI mean for this world? While neither of us is an expert in

-- 82 of 630 --

generative AI, there are some areas that platform developers will probably
want to think about as this technology becomes more widespread:
The tooling around the model experience will matter.
Machine learning operations, or MLOps, is the industry term for the
operations of building, training, deploying, and operating models.
This process is not dissimilar to the SDLC processes that developers
need to use to deliver software, with the exception that the users are
often not engineers but rather researchers or, perhaps increasingly,
other nontechnical people.
This customer base will need a set of coherent tooling that works
within their desired context. In the same way that good developer
tooling supports developers staying within their integrated
development environment of choice, on the command line, or in a
well-connected set of dashboards, thinking about how you can keep
researchers within their notebooks and other familiar contexts rather
than forcing them to jump from platform to platform to do their jobs
will be key to supporting their productivity.
Platforms that help optimize for underlying infrastructure efficiency will
become a focus.
The cost of training these models is high, and there will be a race to
drive efficiencies in the underlying compute and storage resources,
optimize the placement of workloads, and minimize network costs in

-- 83 of 630 --

a way that is transparent to the researcher. Many people are using
APIs from major providers like OpenAI, but as the cost scales with
usage, it is possible that, in time, in-house platforms will be
developed for the most valuable and intensive use cases. We expect
that significant R&D will be applied to the underlying distributed
systems and infrastructure in this space.
The platforms developed for machine learning using company data will
require special focus on controls and data entitlements.
We expect that changing regulations and consumer demands will
increase the need for a solid understanding of data provenance, being
able to explain the outcomes of a model, and knowing who has
access to what data. These are all tricky problems to solve on their
own, and solving them in a holistic way across the ML systems in a
company will demand platform solutions that support meeting these
controls without forcing everyone into an inflexible workflow and
out of their desired working context.
AI will help you operate better, but only if and where you have the data.
Machine learning requires data to make decisions, and specifically
for your own platforms, the only way it will help you is if you have
the instrumentation that can produce the needed data. For many
modern systems this might be easy enough, but for those of you with
legacy applications and platforms, if you want to be able to apply

-- 84 of 630 --

machine learning to improve your operations you’ll need to get on
top of the telemetry.
Platforms will be built that curate the ecosystem of large language
model (LLM) tooling for your company and ensure all of the components
work together well.
This is, if anything, an opportunity for platform engineers to expand
their expertise and value to companies. To date, the world of tooling
to support research and model generation has largely been the
domain of either massive companies like Google or understaffed data
engineering teams that haven’t properly invested in the usability and
operability of their platforms due to a lack of funding and/or
attention. Many of the companies building out in-house AI
infrastructure are hitting the same problems that we have always seen
when dealing with large-scale distributed infrastructure: handling
software and hardware failures, orchestrating the work efficiently,
and debugging when things go wrong.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter, we described the four pillars of successful platform
engineering and gave some examples of what they mean in practice. To
summarize, platform engineering teams should:

-- 85 of 630 --

1. Take a curated product approach, building paved paths and railways as
they identify common customer needs.
2. Develop software-based abstractions. These may include services, APIs,
libraries, OSS customizations, and metadata integrations.
3. Serve a broad base of application developers. The platform should
support multiple tenants, and each tenant should have self-service
capabilities, with appropriate guardrails to prevent the mistakes that
come at scale.
4. Operate foundational offerings, meaning applying high operational
discipline and providing support for the full platform.
If you’re doing all of these things, then you’re doing platform engineering.
There are cases where it will make sense to do less, but beware of the long-
term consequences. Without opinions about what’s in scope, you’ll fail to
manage the overall complexity, and without a customer-centric product
approach, you’ll probably build the wrong systems. If you’re not doing any
software engineering, you’re just doing operations with a high level of
customer empathy. If you are building for only a small set of application
teams, you’re not really building a scaled platform. And without operational
maturity, no one will trust your offerings.
Now that we’ve told you why you should care about platforms, and what
specifically we mean when we talk about platform engineering, we’ll turn
to the hard stuff: how do you actually pull this off?

-- 86 of 630 --

A userspace filesystem mounted by a non-privileged (non-root) user.
1

-- 87 of 630 --

Part II. Platform Engineering Practices
It may be hard for an egg to turn into a bird: it would be a jolly sight
harder for a bird to learn to fly while remaining an egg.
—C.S. Lewis
In Part I, we talked about the “why” and the “what” of platform
engineering, and we hope to have convinced most of you of the value of
doing more of it in your company. But we’re sure that some of you are still
skeptical, wondering whether this isn’t just a rebranding of infrastructure
engineering, DevOps, and SRE, where the team promises to develop
customer-focused products but really just doubles down on operating a
bunch of disjoint OSS and vendor systems. Or you might be skeptical for
other reasons; perhaps you’ve had the experience of new leaders coming in
from an application/product engineering background who think they can
solve all the hard problems of scaled platforms with new software, but who
have no deep appreciation of what’s involved in operating critical and
complex systems.
We’ve lived through these experiences as well, and our goal for Part II is to
teach you how to avoid these outcomes, and so break out of the egg,
eventually to fly. To do this, we’re going to spend the next eight chapters—
the bulk of the book—talking about the “how” of great platform
engineering organizations. We’ll start by discussing getting started,

-- 88 of 630 --

choosing the right people, adopting a product mindset, and operating your
platform successfully. Then we’ll move on to the more complex work of
planning, rearchitecting, migrations, and stakeholder engagement.
This part of the book will walk you through and help you tackle the main
failure cases that we have seen—namely:
You start too early or underestimate the amount of change needed when
it’s time
You don’t have the right blend of people
You don’t think your platforms need product management
You don’t operate your platform well
You struggle to plan and deliver new value on a continuous basis
You are stuck with naive architectures
You burn goodwill with costly migrations
You fail to communicate your value to peer leaders (aka stakeholders)
Let’s take a quick look at each of these in turn, before diving in.
You start too early or underestimate the amount of change needed when
it’s time
As we discussed in Part I, platform engineering comes with costs.
Not only are there the direct costs of engineering time invested but
also cooperative development with customers, which often flows

-- 89 of 630 --

freely when a platform is small, becomes difficult as a platform
scales, and so more formal management mechanisms are needed.
In Chapter 3, “How and When to Get Started”, we’ll first look at
what you should be doing at a small scale, when cooperation is
working, and how to mature slowly into a platform approach. Then,
we’ll look at what you need to consider when a common problem
gets big enough to warrant replacing cooperation with a formal
platform team. Finally, we’ll consider a different getting-started
problem: when you need to change the culture of a traditional
infrastructure-focused organization.
You don’t have the right blend of people
It’s easy to imagine that you can just throw together a group of
motivated engineers and end up with a successful platform
engineering team, but getting the mix of skills needed for a good
team right is a novel undertaking for many. You want a team that has
software engineers who are prepared to develop lots of code, but
those engineers need to have some interest in lower-level systems, a
willingness to not build everything from scratch, and the ability to
work on longer-running projects. As you will usually be building on
top of OSS and vendor systems, you also need people who have a
deep understanding of those technologies and are ready to tackle the
underlying complexity that comes with infrastructure. But you don’t
want everyone on your team to have this background, because

-- 90 of 630 --

building platforms is about more than operating, scaling, and
supporting other people’s software.
Building a great team and a great team culture is often a challenge,
because whoever’s putting the team together will likely come from
one of these backgrounds, and although they’ll know in principle that
they need to hire the others, in practice they may find it hard to
manage people with significantly different strengths than their own.
Thus, in Chapter 4, “Building Great Platform Teams”, we provide
some guidance: we lay out the different kinds of people who should
be on every platform team, what they are great at, and how to build a
culture where they all feel appreciated.
You don’t think your platforms need product management
We all go into platform building with good intentions and great ideas
—and then reality sinks in. All the edge cases that you didn’t factor
into your planning come back to haunt you as a never-ending
backlog of problems your customers are asking you to fix (yesterday,
if possible). Everyone is mad, and stuck. The platform is slowing
your customers down, and no matter how hard you try to get your
team to fix the pile of problems, they never seem able to keep up
with the demand. What do you do?
A key thing to note is that the struggle of balancing “what is” versus
“what if” is just a usual part of growth on the way to success, and

-- 91 of 630 --

this is no different for platform teams than for any SaaS business.
Successful SaaS businesses use product management techniques to
manage these trade-offs and find balance. This allows their
engineering teams to be strategic in balancing their systems’
operational needs and their customers’ requests, and to build great
products that manage complexity rather than passing it through. In
Chapter 5, “Platform as a Product”, we talk about how to adopt a
product mindset and use it to define what your platforms need to be.
You don’t operate your platform well
There’s more to great platforms than stability, but without stability
you will have a hard time getting your colleagues to trust your
systems. Why would they want to be held accountable for the
operational problems of a component? Most platforms critically
depend on OSS and vendor systems. Operating these is something
that infrastructure, SRE, and DevOps teams do well. However, they
don’t usually do it while also owning responsibility for developing
software abstractions that will be used by many application teams
and engineers across the company.
To balance platform feature development with its operation, a
modified approach is needed. In Chapter 6, “Operating Platforms”,
we cover various practices that need to be handled with disciplined
routine, from providing on-call coverage to user support and
operational feedback.

-- 92 of 630 --

You struggle to plan and deliver new value on a continuous basis
It takes time to deliver features in the platform systems that are the
foundation of a business. The best roadmaps are meaningless if
delivering on them takes so much time that some customers decide
they are better off standing up their own shadow platforms. Things
can go off the rails in many ways. We’ve seen insufficient planning
at the project level, with teams going for “big bang” changes that
take too long to implement. We’ve seen teams not factoring
operational load into their roadmaps, then disappointing everyone
when heavily sold new features get reactively deprioritized in favor
of “keeping the business running” activities. Finally, we’ve seen
teams fail in terms of communication, doing all the right things but
not finding the balance between burying their customers in detail
versus being too quiet and leaving everyone wondering why their
engineers aren’t doing more valuable work.
In Chapter 7, “Planning and Delivery”, we cover each of these
failure modes and describe strategies that you can put in place to
ensure they don’t happen in your team.
You are stuck with naive architectures
A product-led approach to building new platforms means they are
often underarchitected for the scale that comes with ongoing success.
It’s easy for them to end up frozen in time—the type of platform that,

-- 93 of 630 --

while foundational to the business, requires substantial operational
work just to meet business expectations, with no engineering time
available for (or tolerance for the risk of) adding new features.
Avoiding this outcome requires an ongoing investment in system
rearchitecture, taking care to avoid the “big bang” flaws we covered
in Chapter 7. In Chapter 8, “Rearchitecting Platforms”, we lay out a
framework that will allow you to enable rearchitectures by ensuring
they continuously deliver incremental business value.
You burn goodwill with costly migrations
No matter how well you plan rearchitectures and other big projects,
at some point some workloads are going to need some customer
work to facilitate migrating between systems. Mandated org-wide
migrations are often a massive tax on application engineering teams,
both in terms of the time spent not delivering top-line features and in
terms of morale, creating a feeling that application engineers are
there to serve the platform’s goals, rather than vice versa.
We covered how platform teams can build platforms that take away
most of this cost in Chapter 1. In Chapter 9, “Migrations and
Sunsetting of Platforms”, we talk about the mechanics of how to do
it.
You fail to communicate your value to peer leaders (aka stakeholders)

-- 94 of 630 --

Finally, you can be doing everything else right and fall victim to
what is sometimes called politics. No matter what “globally right”
optimization you achieve, for certain leaders of application teams, if
you haven’t delivered exactly what their teams need, you’ve done a
bad job. Particularly when you are early in your leadership career,
it’s easy to think of such people as bad actors who need to be brought
in line by the CTO. Unfortunately, the world is not so simple. These
team leaders are not always wrong; they just have a strongly
differing opinion about the value of their part of the business relative
to whatever you are using to make your decisions, and sometimes not
even your “leader in common” will want to make the hard calls that
enable you to make easy decisions. Instead, it’s on you to
communicate, and sometimes compromise.
Thus, in Chapter 10, “Managing Stakeholder Relationships”, we
round out this part of the book by covering some methods that, while
we can’t promise they will win everyone to your side, should buy
you the goodwill to continue executing on your mission.

-- 95 of 630 --

Chapter 3. How and When to Get Started
Once upon a time, there were three little pigs. One pig built a house of
straw, while the second pig built his house with sticks. They built their
houses very quickly and then sang and danced all day because they
were lazy. The third little pig worked hard all day and built his house
with bricks.
—“The Three Little Pigs”
This chapter is targeted at those leaders whose teams are not doing platform
engineering yet. (Those who are doing it already can skip straight to
Chapter 4). We focus on three specific starting points:
In the first section, we talk about what it means to do platform
engineering at a small startup, where it’s usually best to start by building
cooperation around your shared code.
In the second section, we cover how to handle the transition to a formal
platform engineering organization when those initial cooperative
mechanisms start to fail.
In the final section, we cover a different problem that’s typically
encountered in older and larger companies: transitioning a traditional
infrastructure engineering team into a platform engineering culture.

-- 96 of 630 --

Sometimes it’s OK to build your platform quickly from straw and sticks and
use the extra time to build more important things for the business. But it’s
good to know when you need to start laying bricks and how to start
renovating your old stone castle into something more modern.
Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale
While we have a lot of experience running platform teams, most of it has
been at either scaled startups or even larger companies. But we know that
those of you at small startups have some big questions on this topic: Should
you be doing platform engineering? When should you start? How should
you approach it? To answer these questions, we turned to our friend James
Turnbull. James has been a leader in the DevOps space since its inception,
authoring books on Puppet, Docker, Prometheus, and other popular
technologies, as well as writing The Art of Monitoring in 2014. He has also
been a startup executive for most of his career, with a focus on leadership of
early-stage startup teams. Through this experience, James has learned many
lessons on starting and growing startup teams, and in particular how
fostering a culture of cooperation through lightweight processes, sensible
automation, and collaborative decision making helps to maintain cohesion
and productivity in teams as they scale. What follows is from James.
1

-- 97 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 98 of 630 --

When you read about the outcomes of platform engineering, what probably
springs to mind is a mature and efficient platform that enables engineers to
code, build, test, and deploy with the least amount of friction. The presence
of a platform team suggests a level of maturity and stability.
These two concepts are a long way off for early-stage companies. But all
these platforms, and their teams, didn’t just spring into life fully grown.
They emerged from embryonic beginnings, dragging themselves out of a
primordial soup of automation and process. If you’re at an early-stage
company or startup, how do you start this evolution and avoid as many
pitfalls as possible?
Bad news first. You’re going to get things wrong. A lot. This process usually
isn’t the story of an elegant evolution from sensible choices of stacks and
tooling into a fully mature platform. You’ll both underscale and prematurely
optimize. There will be evolutionary dead ends, backtracks, and disasters.
What’s important here is learning from these detours and setbacks. Try not
to make the same mistake twice; try to make new mistakes.
To understand this journey, we will do some Software Engineering™ and
use a maturity model to track our progress. (Apologies to the CMM/CMMI,
which I have shamelessly adapted into the abbreviated elements of my
quick-and-dirty maturity model.) We’ll look at the first two stages of
evolution for platforms, broadly up until an organization has (nominally)
about 50 engineers:2

-- 99 of 630 --

Stage 1: Ad hoc—whatever works right now
Stage 2: Somewhat managed—we’ve started to take a more principled
approach
There are later stages of development as the organization or startup grows,
but this model focuses on the early stages in smaller and startup
organizations.
STAGE 1: AD HOC, JUST CRAWLED FROM THE WATER AND LEARNED TO BREATHE
Most initial startup engineering teams are a few folks sitting around a table
(or on a video call) building a product and probing for product-market fit.
The focus is on short iterations, a minimum viable product, and the quickest
possible cycle time between the code being written and the product being
used.
This focus usually results in no formal processes or tooling. The stack and
tools (and what few processes there might be) are selected based on
individual developer preferences. Code is written fast. Sometimes tests are
present, but often not; code is merged quickly with limited review and is
frequently deployed manually. Most diagnostics and observability metrics
are eyeballed, and problem solving is reactive and localized. Knowledge is
shared organically because the team is small and close-knit; no
documentation or knowledge-sharing processes exist.
In this world, you don’t need a platform team; you need to start with the
bare basics and move fast. The focus is on removing friction between the

-- 100 of 630 --

code being written and deployed. That focus is the foundation for what
might be a platform team someday, but today it’s about getting sh*t done as
you look for product-market fit.
You can make decisions based on your preferences, but you should share
your choices and the basics of what drives them. These basics are the initial
content of the README file in your repository. A few specific
recommendations for Stage 1 follow.
SOURCE CONTROL
Always use source control. It might appear redundant in the world of
GitHub and GitLab to remind people of this, but many startups start using
source control later than you might imagine.
AUTOMATED CONTINUOUS DEPLOYMENT
The easiest lever you have to reduce friction and get users’ eyes on your
product fast is the automated continuous deployment of code. Take
advantage of off-the-shelf deployment tools and stacks that require little or
no configuration. Does your app need Kubernetes from day one? No, it does
not. Seriously, no. Don’t overthink your future scaling needs; focus on
simple, cost-effective solutions that work for now. If, at some point, you go
from tens of users to hundreds of thousands of users, it’s a great problem to
have and that’ll be the right time to think more deeply about scaling.
Many platforms support building an artifact when code is merged to main
and deploying that artifact with little to no human intervention. These range

-- 101 of 630 --

from the venerable PaaS Heroku, to tools the cloud providers and content
delivery networks provide, to hosted application platforms like Netlify,
Vercel, Cloudplane, and Northflank. Selecting a platform is very situational.
Try to balance:
Complexity
Cost
Scale
Lifespan
You can automate the deployment and management of these via code with
tools like Terraform. This automation allows you to build the basis for a
future of automated and managed infrastructure. At this stage, you’re always
asking yourself, “Is this tool business-differentiating or core business for
me?” If it’s not, outsource; get a platform or service to do it for you.
LIGHTWEIGHT PROCESSES
You should frame a lightweight process for recording and tracking work.
When deciding what kind of process to implement, I like Kevin Stewart’s
adaptation of Michael Pollan’s food laws:
Use a process.
Not too much.
Mostly agile.

-- 102 of 630 --

Start with a simple ticket-based system for tracking work. Don’t be overly
concerned with estimates, sprints, or the more formal aspects of (A|a)gile.
Consider tracking the ratio of new feature development to support/technical
debt as a signal of how much velocity your product has and the lowest level
of granularity you initially need. If your team is small, you’re either
shipping product or not.
And that’s it. Don’t overthink things. Don’t rush to create a team to do
platforms. You not only likely do not have the resources to dedicate people
to this mission, but you’ll also risk slowing down the rapid iteration you
need. Cooperative part-time efforts are much better. Get everyone involved
in solving these issues—your engineers are the best people to solve the
problem because they live it.
STAGE 2: SOMEWHAT MANAGED, OR HUNTING AND GATHERING
As your startup finds product-market fit, your team grows, and your product
gains users, pressures on your engineering tools and processes increase. A
larger team means more complex communication requirements, and more
people interacting with your codebase means more complexity in writing,
reviewing, merging, and deploying.
In this stage, your platform’s components emerge, and your environment
becomes managed. That doesn’t mean you launch a platform team. Your
team likely includes a small group focusing on infrastructure and
automation, some dedicated but others with additional responsibilities.

-- 103 of 630 --

These folks may form the nucleus of a future platform team, but for now,
platform engineering is still a shared responsibility.
This stage is also where you will outgrow some initial tool choices. To
support growth, you may need to replace tools that worked fine for 5–25
developers with others that offer better performance, capabilities, or
optimized pricing. You may also need to rethink some tooling and stack
choices that were based on individual developer preferences and require
niche knowledge or skills shared by only some of the engineers on your
team.
The underlying focus of the tooling and solution choices you will make in
this stage will remain: “Is this core business?” If it is not, outsource it to a
platform, service, or tool that takes care of it for you.
Additionally, this is generally the only time you can entertain the phrase
“Let’s rewrite it in…” Usually, those words should elicit cries of “Not ever,
absolutely never under any circumstances.” Early on, though, this might be
the one window where the urge to rewrite is less toxic. Here are some
specific recommendations for Stage 2.
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT
In this stage, you should begin to automate your local development
environment. This development will probably start simply: a shell script
wrapper around a container tool is a typical first pattern. However, this

-- 104 of 630 --

pattern breaks down quickly; it’s hard to manage, configuration drift occurs
as your team grows, and it is frequently fragile during upgrades and updates.
There are some steps you can take to mitigate this. Colocate your
development environment setup in the repository with your source code.
Publish container images containing the elements of your local development
stack when you build the artifacts you deploy into your production
environment. Your wrapper script can then become as simple as installing a
container tool and downloading and launching the required images. Git
hooks can prompt or update the development environment as part of
developers’ regular workflow of pulling and pushing commits, greatly
increasing the likelihood of these environments staying in sync with
production and across your team. This pattern is much easier to manage and
is helpful for keeping up to date with changes.
ALL THE WORLD’S A STAGE
Consider more robust testing and deployment processes for your product.
Prior to this stage, most development was done locally and then pushed,
hopefully automatically, into production or a build. As the team grows and
more complexity emerges, going directly into production can be riskier.
There are at least three complementary areas or branches of evolution to
consider here that will help you mitigate the risk of increased change and
cross-traffic in your development environment:
More robust tests and continuous integration

-- 105 of 630 --

Start to measure test coverage as a metric and ensure coverage grows
by only merging code once there is sufficient test coverage and the
tests are green. Test coverage is not perfect as a metric; it doesn’t
consider the criticality of the code, for example, and doesn’t
distinguish between the coverage of the platform that bills your
customers and something that has a lower impact if it breaks. But at
this early stage, when you’re just getting some tests in place and
setting the muscle memory of “no tests, no merge,” it’s a good driver.
Solidify this foundation by looking at your environment as a form of
“heat map”: identify where bugs, especially customer-impacting
ones, pop up most frequently. These are likely the areas that need that
larger investment in testing.
Branch-based deployments
Build solutions that allow engineers to build and deploy from
branches. This growth might be part of local development, or it may
expand to branch deployments for on-demand or ephemeral
environments.
Feature flagging
Hide features you are building behind flags that allow you to limit the
damage if they are buggy or unstable. Remember, a feature-flagging
system is very, very likely not core business for you. Follow the
maxim: if it isn’t core business, leverage someone else’s solution.

-- 106 of 630 --

OBSERVABILITY
You should have basic observability for your platform and workflows by
now. You want to know that builds complete successfully, alert on failures,
and be aware of your environment’s status and performance. To achieve this,
you’ll need metrics and exception and application logging for your platform
and workflows. If you don’t have these, you should start building them.
There’s hopefully a shortcut here: you likely have observability around your
product already (if you don’t, why not?). You can extend your existing
tooling to include your platform and workflows.
HAVE THE RIGHT TECHNOLOGY
Local development, branch deployments, ephemeral environments, feature
flagging, enhancements to observability, and CI/CD will require that your
infrastructure be automated. You should have the basis for this from your
initial work in Stage 1 on automating your infrastructure for deployment.
Build on this to fully manage your production environment. Then, take
advantage of and extend this work to manage continuous integration and
capabilities like ephemeral environments for development and testing.
SOCIALIZE CHANGE AND DECISION MAKING
Now is the time to consider a more formal process for managing change in
your environment’s stack and architecture. Changes now have a much wider
impact, and individual developer choices must be considered in the context
of the organization’s larger needs. Choose a framework to help you make
decisions and review changes. A good starting point is a Request for
Comments (RFC)–like process, like that used by open source projects such

-- 107 of 630 --

as React, Swift, and Rust. Another option is using architectural design
records (ADRs). Keep it lightweight, but any approach that considers the
pros and cons of solutions, including technology, logistical, operational, and
budgetary considerations, can be appropriate.
KNOWING WHEN TO MOVE UP
Moving between stages is, unfortunately, hard to plan and predict. Often, the
first time you know a tool or process is at breaking point is when it breaks.
One failure frequently triggers a cascade of failures. This isn’t entirely a bad
thing, as it shows you what you need to invest in and when, but it can make
for a chaotic and stressful environment. Accept that, no matter where you
are, things will never be entirely a smooth ride.
While they may not perfectly correspond to your experience, a general
understanding of these initial stages of evolution should give you a sense of
the landscape and journey and help you identify areas of risk and where to
focus your development. When you need to advance, either in response to
pain points or an actual failure, review the current state and determine how
much change you need. Is your existing tool or process a total loss, or can
you expand or adapt it? Plan the changes you want to make and, most
importantly, get buy-in from your fellow engineers. Platforms at this point
are cooperative endeavors. Engineers often choose individual tools due to
personal preferences or prior experience, and you need to ensure you get
them on board if you want to make changes to your shared platform.

-- 108 of 630 --

Finally, be patient. This process will take time and compromise, and results
may not appear immediately or consistently.
Creating the Platform Teams That
Replace Cooperation
As organizations grow, their practices must evolve and grow as well. That
low-overhead, ad hoc cooperation around common code and tools that
served everyone so well when there were 20 people using them often starts
causing problems when there are significantly more. Like all straws that
break the camel’s back, the actual event that forces people to confront the
shortcomings is often minor. It could be a slow buildup of technical debt
that causes reliability or developer productivity problems. Or it could be a
sudden business change that exposes the underlying unmanageable
complexity—for example, an acquisition, or a migration to another vendor.
No matter the event, it becomes clear that the right thing didn’t happen, and
that there is no owner accountable for making sure the right thing happens
in the future. And so a platform is born.
A useful number to keep in mind is Dunbar’s number: when you have a
cooperative group of between 50 and 250 people, it’s no longer possible for
everyone to know all the other members. This is the point at which you need
more formal processes that define owners and assign accountability.

-- 109 of 630 --

Because the rule applies to the size of each cooperative group in the
company, this can happen at different times; it usually happens early for
infrastructure and backend developer platforms that must work for everyone
in engineering, but later for data, frontend, and external customer APIs.
Even at companies that already have platforms, each new platform team
usually struggles out of the gate. That’s because the cooperative
mechanisms, despite their flaws, were in place and functional for a long
time, and there is no way a centralized team will displace them immediately.
Worse, a centralized team creates new conflicts: engineers who used to
cooperate to solve problems now argue about whether the platform team
needs to do the work to fix the platform, or the customer team needs to do
work to fix how they use the platform.
In the rest of this section, we lay out what you need to consider when you
supplant cooperation with a formal platform and formal platform
engineering.
Are the Benefits of Centralizing Ownership Worth
the Costs?
When you see application teams building similar software, it’s natural to
think it would be more efficient to have a centralized, common platform.
However, each centralized offering creates a new coordination point for
application teams, and the more coordination points they have to work

-- 110 of 630 --

through to get their products shipped, the harder their jobs become. This
means your reasoning for creating a new platform offering needs to be about
leverage rather than just efficiency. The argument that “we could have two
engineers building a common platform where instead we have five
engineers working on similar code some of the time” is insufficient.
Sometimes there is a big leverage cost to having too many ways of solving a
common problem. In the case of a billing platform, for example, you
probably want your customers to get billed in a consistent manner rather
than it being ad hoc depending on the business they are working with. But
sometimes companies insist on a level of standardization that doesn’t bring
meaningful value and slows application teams down. Do you really have to
have only one caching solution? Does every team need to use the same
standardized web framework? Make sure a standard platform will bring
leverage—outsized value that is hard to replicate.
You might want to do a quick total cost of ownership estimate: if this system
requires a large team to build and maintain, and it can support multiple
teams without significant configuration or logic changes for each team, it’s a
good candidate for solving once. But if it has a small cost to build and
maintain, and especially if each application wants to configure or extend its
logic, it’s probably not a great candidate for centralizing.
Realize the Collective Dynamic Is Gone

-- 111 of 630 --

This sounds obvious (you wouldn’t be making the change if this weren’t the
case!), but in practice there is a human dimension that makes it hard for
everyone to realize that it’s past time for a change. So, you’ll have
customers with rose-colored glasses remembering when they could open
pull requests on the platform codebase at will, and insisting that any process
is just “big company ideas” brought in by problematic newcomers or
“process for process’s sake.” This can be well-intentioned, but in our
experience, some of them will never stop complaining about change, even
when their own management begs them to cool it. Handling such criticism is
one of the reasons we emphasize “customer empathy” as a platform team
hiring requirement later in the book.
It’s not just customer engineers who make this mistake, though; often it’s
the platform teams themselves. They think back to a major change that was
done in a month across a shared codebase that served 50 users and assume
that they can make a similar change, in a similar way, for a platform serving
500. Yes they know they have more users, but shouldn’t it be easier now
with a dedicated platform team? They can’t see that the growth of the
platform also impacts the way they need to approach major changes. The
breadth of use cases has increased, and the number of people implementing
and consuming the use cases has also increased. “Five good engineers in a
room” can no longer represent all perspectives, which means a lot more
opinions and a lot more conflict in getting to a decision. All of this means
that change is now going to be much slower.

-- 112 of 630 --

Focus on Solving Problems, Not New Technology
or Architecture
Given that you have delayed forming a platform team until its leverage
clearly outweighs the costs of coordination, the state of the initial system
will often not resemble anything like a platform. APIs and service
boundaries will be poor, if they exist at all—lots of platforms start as
common code, in libraries or monoliths. There will often be duplicate
implementations coming from different application teams. Now that you
have a centralized team, there will be demands from customers to make this
all more “engineered” and so easier for them to use.
Given that they have inherited a disparate mess, it is tempting for the new
platform team to want to step back and bring in a new architecture or
technology that allows them to do just that. However, as we just discussed,
change is going to be much slower now! At this point, a full migration of an
established platform to a new technology may take years to fully complete.
That means new technologies or architectures won’t help your in-production
application teams with pressing problems. In fact, they take potential
resources away from solving the problems via faster changes to the current
systems.
At this point your team hasn’t built any trust, only goodwill. You have just
created a new organizational silo, and your goal should be to figure out how
to maintain as much collaboration with the rest of engineering as possible.

-- 113 of 630 --

You need to deliver value quickly to develop trust, and even if you make
architectural decisions that turn out in hindsight to be fully correct, your
users will be skeptical until they start seeing value. So early on, look to the
most pressing problems in the messy common code, such as libraries and
monoliths, and look for solutions that deliver value as fast as you can. Think
of your job now as detangling more than rearchitecting, and make sure you
are delivering incremental value throughout.
Beware of New Engineers Coming from Much
Bigger Companies
In Chapter 4 we’ll go into detail about the strategies for staffing a platform
team, but for now we offer you a caution: when you are creating your
platform engineering team, be careful about hiring senior engineers and
engineering managers from very big tech companies. It’s tempting to hire
such people because they have seen the next order of magnitude of scale.
But while they may have experience with equivalent platforms at greater
scale, they probably didn’t work on the equivalent to your platform at the
scale you are at today. As a result, you can end up with people who are very
confident that they know the solution to your problems, when all they really
know is what the fully delivered solution looked like at a company with a
different culture that may have faced somewhat similar problems some time
ago.

-- 114 of 630 --

We’re not saying you should never hire these sorts of engineers—some of
the strongest engineers on our teams came from big company backgrounds
and wanted to go somewhere where they could make a bigger impact. Just
be careful. Interview them for their skills and attitude, rather than thinking
their big company knowledge has inherent value. The “design” slot of
interviews can be a good place to detect this bias. If they always jump to
“BigCo X technology Y” as the solution to any problem posed in the
interview, without being able to consider its pros and cons, then they likely
won’t be able to extend their situational reasoning within the role either.
Be Slow to Hire Product Managers (and Avoid
Project Managers)
A final word that follows from the last: you need to have a fully staffed and
working model of a platform engineering team before you start hiring
product managers (PMs), and you need to wait even longer before hiring
project managers.
We have three reasons for this recommendation:
The optics of hiring non-engineers before you’ve shown your ability to
deliver as a small engineering team are often negative for customers. It
suggests that you are so bad at communicating with them that you need a
specialist.

-- 115 of 630 --

Often the work to be done in the first year or two of a platform is
straightforward problem solving through technology build-out, and the
number of customer teams is small enough that your engineers and
engineering managers can do lightweight informal requirements
gathering.
Your early senior engineers and engineering managers need to set the
tone for communicating with customers with product focus that the team
needs to keep as it grows. If you bring in a product manager too soon,
this will be offloaded to them, and your engineers will never have
firsthand customer empathy.
You will eventually need product and project managers, but the number you
hire will depend on your culture and your problems. Our rule of thumb is
that the number of product managers for a mature organization should sit
somewhere between the number of team-level managers and managers-of-
managers. The ratio for project managers should be significantly higher—
there should be about 50 people on your platform team before it needs its
first project manager, and ideally you’ll never go above that 1:50 ratio.
Thinking you need more or need them sooner is usually a signal to do a lot
more definition of your platform’s abstractions to avoid its changes
requiring so much work of its users.
Finally, as we will talk about in Chapter 4, be careful to interview for
“process fit” at this point, because many product and project managers who
are great working within the established guardrails of bigger companies

-- 116 of 630 --

can’t get things done without them. You need to hire people who can work
without strict guardrails or well-established processes and who won’t just
spend their first year trying to re-create those processes.
Bonus Problems for Integration/Shared Services
Platforms
To round out this section, we want to touch on the special problems of a
different type of platform team that pops up at scaled companies—the
platform team that horizontally supports multiple (external) products.
Examples include:
Billing
User login, identity, and access management
Mobile and web application platforms
Revenue systems
Shared application services (notifications, search, analytics, messaging)
These are trickier than pure “infrastructure” and “developer” platforms as
they end up with some surface area directly visible to the external customer.
As you consider whether to create such a team, it’s worth asking a couple of
questions:
How will you partner with external product management?

-- 117 of 630 --

When you build products with business-facing surface area, business-
facing product managers come with the territory. So, in these cases
we advise hiring a PM much earlier—maybe as soon as the team is
formed. However, you need to avoid the mistake of thinking every
successful business-focused PM can successfully transition to internal
platforms. They’ll be accustomed to being evaluated based on
whether they can deliver the company revenue and profits, so they’ll
be focused on business and customer needs. This likely means that
not only will they want to leave platform aspects like “reliability” and
“developer productivity” to their engineering manager counterparts to
scope and prioritize, but they will also demand that such concerns
take secondary priority unless they have visible customer impact, at
which point it’s usually far too late to solve them with cheap or easy
fixes.
Furthermore, there is an aspect of “the bike shed and the nuclear
plant” in the business-focused decisions—meaning that small
aspects of, say, UI design (the bike shed) become massive areas of
investment because they are much more visible in the product than
the underlying code and architecture (the nuclear plant), despite the
latter providing the greatest leverage to the business. For some
platforms, this makes every customer-visible platform decision of
interest to executives like the CEO and head of project management.
With the wrong product manager, this can leave engineers spending
too much time “pleasing the CEO” by working on small details in the
3

-- 118 of 630 --

UI design and other end user interfaces while the core technology is
neglected. This eventually leads not just to reliability problems, but to
internal customer usability being neglected as well.
Of course, some business-focused product managers can make the
transition; they just need to embrace a different role with a broader
set of success criteria. We offer specific hiring advice in Chapter 4.
How will everyone find your offerings?
A major element that is underconsidered in building integration
platforms is the challenge of discoverability. The bigger the company,
the harder it is for people to realize that your team has offerings that
they might need, particularly when these are semioptional systems
that aren’t needed by everyone. You may not want to mandate that
every product in the company use your search service, for example,
but it can start to cause friction when some external customers
experience different search behaviors as they move across your
business’s product portfolio. When application teams are trying to
quickly spin something up, they may not bother taking the time to see
what’s out there and instead use their own preferred combination of
vendor, OSS, and team-built systems. This allows them to ship
quickly, until they need to integrate with the bigger picture—and then
suddenly everything gets very messy indeed.

-- 119 of 630 --

It’s easy for an integration platform’s semioptional offerings to get
lost in the shuffle until someone notices that product X didn’t bother
to use the platform offering and now everyone is up in arms.
Engineers get in their own way here by giving their internal platforms
cutesy names that don’t clearly describe what they do: naming your
billing platform “Glengarry” instead of “Billing Platform” does not
help your discoverability problem. Be sure you make a plan for how
you will deliver awareness across the company for your offering.
Start with a name that makes sense. Write documentation that is
searchable on the company intranet. Send out email announcements,
run learning sessions, or speak at company meetings to drive
knowledge and awareness of your platform. It doesn’t matter how
you decide to do it; it just matters that you do it. Without a plan for
getting the word out, you’re likely to get lost in the shuffle.

-- 120 of 630 --

BEING STUCK IN THE MIDDLE
It’s worth pointing out that integration platform teams are inherently stuck
in the middle. They usually aren’t part of the core/infrastructure platform
organization, which manages the underlying compute, storage, networking,
and often security and identity offerings. They may not have the superuser
access that these core teams have, because they are seen as application-layer
offerings, which can make building shared platforms challenging. Sitting
between applications and the underlying core platforms also means that they
are subject to errors on both sides of the stack, and this can make debugging
and operations that much trickier.
Because of those technical details, it is important to keep integration
platform teams aligned to the core platforms, even if they don’t sit under the
same organization chart as the core/infrastructure platform team. Especially
when initiatives span the two (a classic here is the API gateway, visible to
customers’ API calls, but also core networking infrastructure), beware of
conflict between the teams, which is inherent because they have different
alignments around assessing value. You can mitigate this by building
camaraderie at the engineering level, through social team building events
and common conferences and by having engineers from each side work
together on projects whenever possible.

-- 121 of 630 --

Transforming a Traditional Infrastructure
Organization
Finally, we come to companies that have been around for a while, where the
move to platform engineering is a transformation program that seeks to add
product management and software sensibilities to an existing infrastructure
engineering organization. This requires not only a skill set change in the
makeup of the organization but also a major cultural change, moving from
what is usually a siloed, process- and tech-focused mindset to a portfolio-,
usability-, and customer-focused mindset. This is a hard transformation, and
it’s easy for people who have spent their whole careers building
infrastructure to misunderstand what “product” and “platform” really mean.
Your Whole Engineering Culture Has to Change
Yes, seriously.
Infrastructure organizations tend to be good at many things. They’re good at
cost management, vendor negotiations, and running systems at scale. They
have specialists who know about the murky depths of databases, the nuances
of networking, and how to debug nasty kernel issues. They may even be
good at triaging bug requests from tens or hundreds of teams, planning
large-scale failure tests, and coordinating massive migrations.

-- 122 of 630 --

Unfortunately, they are not usually very good at thinking about the people
who will use their systems, taking their preferences into account, and
treating them like customers whom they are trying to keep. (Why should
they? The people who use their systems are often a captive audience! ) You
may or may not want to move away from designating this team as the
preferred provider for core technology, but either way, a shift needs to
happen if you want to adopt that curated product approach we discussed in
Part I.
A culture that focuses on cost, scale, and process over people and usability
is very hard to root out. And you don’t want to lose all those rare skills in
the process. So what do you do?
Identify the Most Promising Areas to Start
You don’t have to change your whole team all at once! Trying to force this
transformation upon the most conservative parts of your organization will
distract you from making it successful with the teams that are ready and
eager for the change. You’ll have better luck if you start with the areas that
are already close to “platform engineering,” learn what works, and expand
from there.
Seek out teams that are delivering modern offerings, as these are most likely
to have many of the elements you need to kick off this transition. Some of
the characteristics that make for a promising team include a concentration of
4

-- 123 of 630 --

software engineers and bespoke software (versus packaged vendor systems
or physical hardware) with a high rate of change and delivery of new
features. You can also look for places where there is a large pent-up demand
for modernization, such as moving from physical infrastructure or virtual
machines to elastic container–based compute offerings. As we will discuss
in Chapter 4, successful platform teams are made up of a blend of software
engineers and systems engineers; where you have this mix, or are in the
process of creating it, you are primed to make the transition.
Recognize That You Can’t Just Rub Product
Managers on It and Call It a Day
As tempting as it might be, just hiring product managers won’t guarantee
success. Even if you could find enough good product managers who want
this type of job, they’re useful only when they’re paired with willing
engineering teams. If the engineering teams don’t feel a sense of ownership
for delivering a great product to their customers, PMs are unlikely to close
that gap, and more likely to turn into glorified backlog groomers than true
product leaders.
Look for the areas that are already more customer-centric and start to
introduce some product-oriented approaches to these areas.
Change the Way You Support Your Products

-- 124 of 630 --

The ticket system black hole is a great way to make your customers feel
more like a burden than a focus. We understand that it’s hard to manage all
the incoming requests for your teams, but keeping a close eye on how you
provide support, what your response time is for questions, and how you
triage incoming issues is critical to this transition. Your engineers should
spend time supporting their products. If they are not regularly answering
questions, they are missing a chance to appreciate the pain that customers
are facing when trying to use their systems.
Be careful about making this optional or leaving it to junior engineers. Your
senior folks will not build the kinds of humane products that you need if
they are incapable of interacting with the users in a polite and helpful way,
no matter how brilliant they might seem. If you have someone you can’t
trust to engage productively to support, enable, and help other engineers,
watch out, because this person is probably not building products that are
easy to use. Over time, you may find yourself redoing a lot of their work
because it’s hard to support and drives a high volume of complaints. We will
offer more strategies for handling this in Chapter 6.
Update Your Interview Process
In the next chapter, we will discuss in depth the kinds of people you need in
platform engineering teams—but to get you started on this transformation,
we recommend adding what we call “customer empathy screening” to all of
your interviews. This doesn’t have to be deep; it can be as simple as asking

-- 125 of 630 --

the interviewees how they think about writing code so that other developers
can understand it, or what their approach is to answering questions about the
systems they have built. The idea is to set the tone that you expect your
developers to think not just about how to build the systems, but also about
the people who are going to use them or work with them.
Update Your Systems of Recognition and Reward
If you only promote people who solve big technical problems, you’re going
to have a hard time retaining the people who do the work to smooth out the
usability edges, actively listen to the customer teams, and adjust their work
priorities to fix the stuff that is causing the most pain. So, look closely at
what you are celebrating, compensating, and promoting, and make sure you
are including work that makes the product better, whatever that looks like,
even if it isn’t the hardest technical bits. You may even want to reevaluate
your engineering ladder to make sure the expectations at each level reflect
all of the skills you now demand. Remember, this is a cultural change, and
cultural changes that don’t involve changes to what is valued (as seen by
what you recognize and reward) are destined to fail.
Don’t Have Too Many Project Managers
There may always be some need for project managers, but infrastructure
organizations that rely too heavily on project managers can lack up-front
technical planning around one of the most common infrastructure team

-- 126 of 630 --

tasks: migrations. If your migrations are so painful that both your team and
your customer teams need project managers to understand where all the
dependencies lie and track what’s happening, you are not taking ownership
of the user experience of your software. Yes, migrations are part of your
UX! If your organization is in the habit of offering new systems that are not
compatible with the systems they are replacing, and you expect customers to
do all the work to migrate to those new systems on your timeline, which
doesn’t take into account their other obligations, you have a lot of work to
do here.
As part of moving to a platform model, you have to own much more of the
migration process than you have up until now. The platform value add must
include lowering the migration pain for customers. By limiting the number
of project managers now, you force platform engineers to take on project
management work they would otherwise avoid. And the good ones will
realize that if they create automation to support the migration (whether it’s
detection of dependencies, compatibility-bridging libraries, or abstractions
that allow them to change the internals without changing the client
libraries), they won’t have to do so much of that tedious project
management work. By saving themselves time, they will save their
customers time. So, limiting project managers is a good forcing function—
just make sure you’re giving engineers time to do this work.

-- 127 of 630 --

Accept That Your Team Will Spend More Time
Talking to Customers and Less Time Writing
Code
There’s no way to shortcut the product mindset transition for your
engineering team. As we explained earlier, you can’t just add a product
manager or a customer advisory board meeting once a quarter and call it a
day. The team needs to spend more time with the customers, and more time
strategically planning for how to address holistic concerns, rather than just
triaging the latest set of customer complaints. There will be an up-front cost
as you change the way people work. They may complete fewer tickets or
experience slowdowns in other process-oriented measures of productivity,
and the pace of work might look slower than it did when they were just
churning through a never-ending backlog of tickets. But over time, the work
produced should be better, as measured by customer surveys, adoption,
migration timelines, and, eventually, engineering productivity.
Do the Necessary Restructuring
With all of the changes we’re proposing, inevitably some folks in your
organization will fail to make the jump from the past ways of working to the
new culture and processes. Leaders, including senior individual
contributors, who don’t get on board with the changes can sink the
transition, and you may need to replace these leaders to support the new

-- 128 of 630 --

culture. Don’t be afraid to restructure as needed to set your team up for
success.
Keep It Fun!
By the time companies go through this transition, there’s often a deeply
ingrained us-versus-them mentality between the infrastructure organization
and the other application engineering teams. It never feels good to have an
antagonistic relationship with your users and colleagues. So, while this
transition is going to be tricky, why not try and make it fun too? Get
feedback from your users about what they love about the product. Share
kudos as they come in and take the time to celebrate improvements in your
customer satisfaction metrics. Make sure your teams are part of the
celebrations when their work enables an application team to do something
they couldn’t do before. This is an exciting opportunity: a chance to learn, to
modernize your approaches to work, and to create a more positive culture.
Leading with a positive attitude will make all the difference in how fun it is
for everyone.
In many ways, this cultural shift echoes the changes that happened during
the DevOps/SRE transformation. Engineers in SRE/DevOps organizations
do not build code that they carelessly throw over the wall to an operations
team. In the same way, engineers in a product-focused platform organization
do not build infrastructure without considering its users. These
transformations ask more of the engineering teams, but they deliver higher-

-- 129 of 630 --

quality outcomes as a result. It’s expensive and takes time, but we promise
you, it’s worth it.
Wrapping Up
In this chapter, we have covered the three main scenarios that might lead
you to consider platform engineering. At an early-stage startup, you
probably don’t want formal platform engineering, but that doesn’t mean
there is nothing platform-related for you to work on. Instead, make sure
you’re investing in some baseline activities to keep the team moving fast.
Once you’ve grown enough that you are hitting problems in the shared code
that are too big to handle through volunteer efforts, you can introduce your
first platform team. Make sure that this team doesn’t immediately turn itself
into a silo; you want to deliver value fast and maintain a strong connection
with the rest of engineering. As you continue reading this book, you will
hear about all kinds of things that a mature platform engineering team will
have to deal with: scaled customer support models, developing platforms as
products, and strategies for rearchitecting legacy systems. But right now, it’s
important not to overdo any of this. If you try to immediately set up the kind
of platform that only a scaled company needs, with the trappings of maturity
like project managers, big company engineers, and cutting-edge technology,
you’re more likely to build the wrong thing. There’s no need to rush this

-- 130 of 630 --

complexity; focus on solving today’s problems, not the problems that might
crop up years from now.
This is also the point at which some companies spin off integration
platforms—that is, platforms that sit higher in the stack than infrastructure
or developer tooling and serve shared product needs. With these, you have
to do all the same things as with a developer-only platform, but you also
have to deal with the hard problems of defining your mandate, getting the
word out to engineers who may be inclined to work around you, and
partnering with external product managers. It’s a tough gig!
Finally, there are those at big companies who need to make the transition
from more traditional infrastructure engineering teams to platform
engineering. In this case, you have a big change management challenge
ahead of you within your own organization, and you’re going to want to be
thoughtful about how you ease into that change. You don’t have to do it all
at once, and you probably don’t want to try! Find your most platform-ready
teams and get them going while updating your processes for support, hiring,
and promotions. Slowly add in product managers and ease the culture away
from what might have been a cost- and throughput-focused model to one
that has room for everyone to talk to customers. You may have to make
some personnel changes in the process, but keep top of mind that your goal
is to make life better for all of the technologists at your company, including
the ones on your own team, and focus on the positive as much as possible.

-- 131 of 630 --

Which, we are loath to admit, is harder than just “singing and dancing,” and not at all “lazy,” in the
negative sense of the word.
Based roughly on Dunbar’s model, discussed later in this chapter, which says we can have about 50
“friends.”
See https://bikeshed.com.
We find that even when there is no formal mandate that all application teams use what infrastructure
provides, in practice, most engineering leadership will default to requiring that their teams adopt these
offerings to minimize their own risk and overhead for building their own shadow infrastructure.
1
2
3
4

-- 132 of 630 --

Chapter 4. Building Great Platform
Teams
It’s not DNS.
There’s no way it’s DNS.
It was DNS.
—SSBroski
We start with a quote about DNS because it’s a fundamental system most
platforms depend on, and at close to 40 years old it seems it should be well
understood by now. Yet, the point of the quote is that DNS still causes
complex failures regularly, and it takes expertise not just to debug them, but
also to avoid more DNS issues in the future. This is also the challenge with
staffing platform teams: by developing abstractions over complex systems,
these teams enable productivity for your users, but if they aren’t staffed
with experts who understand those systems, they will create operational
problems down the road.
We laid out the systems engineer (administrator) versus software engineer
(developer) dichotomy in Chapter 1, as we think it is essential to
understanding the challenges of not just building a platform engineering
team, but creating the right team culture. It’s tempting to insist that building
1

-- 133 of 630 --

a good team is just a matter of finding people who are skilled at both. And
yes, as much as possible, you should seek out engineers who are strong
software developers as well as capable of understanding complex systems
they didn’t develop. But no one is good at everything, so the way you build
great platform teams is by hiring people with diverse strengths and creating
a culture where each is enabled to succeed.
In this chapter, we give you the tools to do so. First, we’ll explore the
behaviors and challenges of teams that are focused on only one side of the
systems versus software divide. Then we’ll introduce the four major roles
for engineers on a platform team and cover how you build processes for
hiring and recognition to accommodate all four roles. We’ll look at the
characteristics of great platform-engineering managers and at some special-
purpose roles that collaborate closely with platform teams. Finally, we’ll
finish with some guidance on how to use all this to create a great team
culture.
Getting your team set up right is as important as getting DNS configured
correctly; while one bad hire probably won’t take down your entire
platform, you need to spend time implementing this foundation in order to
achieve long-term success.
The Risks of Single-Focus Platform
Teams

-- 134 of 630 --

As we covered in Chapter 1, when the responsibility for platforms is
assigned to teams with a narrow focus or skill set, the result for a company
tends to be that not enough platforms get created, leading to the “over-
general swamp.” Before we present a solution, we want to paint a better
picture of the problem. The types of teams we describe here embody
outcomes at the extreme; we’re not talking about all engineers or teams, but
showing the consequences of how staffing around a single focus leads to a
culture that doesn’t deliver great platforms, and will also struggle to change.
Too Much Systems Focus
In this scenario, you have a team that is heavily populated by people who
came up through infrastructure, DevOps, SRE, and systems engineering
roles. Your team members usually have computer science or software
engineering degrees, but few have written significant amounts of code
within large software systems.
What they do well
These teams are great operationally. They know that the platform powers
the business and take pride in that. They know the operation of their
systems inside and out, including the underlying systems. When the Asia
region experiences downtime at 2 a.m., not only is the US-based team on
top of it, but their leadership team is awake and ready to help too.

-- 135 of 630 --

The next day, not only will they be done with the incident review, but they
will have a quick mitigation in production already and will be planning
more hands-on work to make the longer-term fixes. They’ll grumble and
blame leadership for letting the “wrong” thing get built, but they’ll still get
it done. You can set your clock by them: they are reliable and hardworking,
and they pay great attention to operational detail.
What they do badly
The code this team actively develops is mostly automation, templating, and
one-off tools. They aren’t doing much to build better platform abstractions
to manage complexity, or working on a better architecture to solve
operational problems for good.
Faced with the flaws of a system they can’t change, they reach for rules and
processes, often cataloged in meticulous wikis. Of course, users constantly
run afoul of these rules, to the eternal frustration of both sides. To make any
progress, the team management heavily leverages project managers,
harassing customers’ engineers to do one-off work that the platform team is
incapable of streamlining.
Why they are stuck
Among both the leadership and the engineers, these teams tend to have a
strong bias toward hiring experienced systems people who are already

-- 136 of 630 --

strong operators, steeped in directly relevant system knowledge. Their
interviews, especially for senior-level candidates, emphasize the kinds of
details found deep in books and manual pages. They might as well hang a
sign over the interview room door saying “no software engineers need
apply.”
They justify this by arguing “that’s what we need operationally,” “we can’t
afford to train anyone with this workload,” and sometimes, “what type of
software engineer would be happy on this team?” The problem is that their
technical filter becomes a cultural filter, and generalist senior software
engineers—the type who could build better abstractions to shift the burden
of operational load—stay away. Often the only software engineers such a
team can hire are recent graduates, who tend to move on after a year or two
due to a lack of mentorship. This personnel churn reinforces the team’s
belief that their culture isn’t the problem; the problem is that their systems
are just not appealing to software engineers.
Too Much Development Focus
In this scenario, the team is full of people who have spent their careers as
software engineers and software engineering managers. They like to write
code—lots of code. They probably have degrees in computer science and
have been writing software for a long time, but usually very little of that
experience involved developing platforms or infrastructure.

-- 137 of 630 --

What they do well
These teams are builders. They nerd out on their platform architectures and
technologies and think big about what comes next. They love to talk about
“golden paths,” “vNext,” and “next-gen” platforms that will surely fix all
the flaws of the current platform. And they’re not wrong—at least, not in a
reality where they had infinite time to deliver it.
What they do badly
This type of team reflects an adage among software engineers: that
technical debt is any code some other engineers wrote. They get frustrated
by any work that isn’t building a newer, better system, and they view any
effort expended on improving the old system as “throwaway” work, as it
distracts from building the new system faster. What they overlook is the
frustration and hampered productivity of the current system’s users. This is
made worse when, like most software engineers, they are too optimistic in
their project estimates.
In the meantime, they treat the current in-product platform as what systems
consultant Carla Geisser calls “haunted graveyards”: curiosities to be
carefully poked, not systems to be understood. This leads to operational
problems, eventually causing a negative business impact. That 2 a.m.
downtime issue? You’ll probably have to page the on-call engineer a couple

-- 138 of 630 --

of times before they respond, and if you try the manager, they’ll likely be
upset that you thought waking them would solve any problem.
Why they are stuck
In the last 20 years, the industry has come to view delivering new code as
the most valuable thing software engineers can spend time on, and has
heavily tied it to compensation and promotions. This bias has spread to
software engineering managers, since they got where they are by writing
lots of code. So, for instance, they cannot imagine hiring anyone with the
title “software engineer” who can’t solve toy algorithm problems on a
whiteboard in 30 minutes, regardless of their other, more practical abilities.
Some managers may grant that such an engineer does actually have value,
but even in that case, they’ll probably find it hard to believe they should be
on the same team as their “real” software engineers. They will insist that
there must be some other title for the work, some other team they should be
on where they aren’t distracting those undertaking the important work of
developing software. In fact, ideally they would just be doing whatever is
possible to make that software development go faster—per the split
SRE/DevOps model, “taking on all the operations load, support, toil, and
automation grunt work that distracts my software engineers from creating
code.” The problem is that unless the platform is massive, nobody wants
that job.

-- 139 of 630 --

The Different Roles of Platform
Engineers
To unstick teams that are too focused on software or systems, you need to
equally value both types of work, which usually means adding new roles to
the team. This requires understanding what value each role brings. That’s
our goal in this section: even if you’re not a manager, we want to help you
better appreciate how your role relates to those of your coworkers.
The first step is realizing that the old software versus systems split, which
does a good job of explaining how individuals’ focuses may differ, does a
poor job of illustrating how their roles relate. On the software side, the
problem is that the term “software engineer” is used to describe a broad
variety of roles outside of platform teams, and so misses the fact that
various aspects of this role are different on a platform team—and these are
differences you need to be aware of, hire for, and recognize.
Things are more complex on the systems side, where there are a plethora of
roles and titles. While a lot of the work between them is duplicative, there
are also specializations not just in skill set but also in culture. To simplify,
we believe that three major systems-focused roles are needed in a platform
team:
Systems engineer

-- 140 of 630 --

A true systems generalist, which many would call a DevOps
engineer, although many other names are used across the industry
Reliability engineer
Someone who has deeply focused their role on reliability, ignoring
other facets of systems engineering
Systems specialist
This could encompass many specific roles based on specific deep
expertise—for example, Linux engineer, performance engineer,
network development engineer
We show how these all relate in terms of team composition in Figure 4-1. In
the following subsections, we’ll take a closer look at each of these four
roles in turn.
Figure 4-1. Breaking down the major engineering roles in a platform engineering team

-- 141 of 630 --

Software Engineers
Your software engineers are going to be people who can and will write a lot
of code. On most platform teams, these will be “backend” engineers—
people who are used to writing server-side code—although you may have
some “frontend” engineers as well. In successful platform teams, most of
the software engineers, particularly the more senior ones, are a bit different
from the generalist “backend” software engineers found in application
teams:
They are drawn to understanding systems.
They have a strong desire to understand the interaction of their code
and the systems the code runs on top of. They’re not just interested in
completing a feature for an end user, but think carefully about how
their code fits into the ecosystem of software, hardware, and
networking that it runs within, seeking a deeper understanding of the
browser, the operating system, distributed systems,
databases/storage, or whatever else is relevant.
You can spot these engineers because they’re the ones who want to
read the code for the libraries they depend on, and who are curious
about the failure patterns that happen at the edges of applications.
They want to think about the system more broadly than the feature
they are implementing, and they are willing to figure out not only
how to code the system but how to operate it and support it, because

-- 142 of 630 --

how can they know if the code makes sense if they don’t understand
how it actually runs in production?
They are comfortable being on call for business-critical systems.
This matters because, as we will cover in Chapter 6, most platforms
are staffed at a level where they need every expert to be part of an
on-call rotation, handling events of business-critical impact with
ambiguous causes. None of us loves being on call, but the important
thing here is not just a willingness to do it, but also the ability to be
on call and respond effectively. We have found that many software
engineers love to pore over the details of systems, but as an
intellectual matter at design and coding time, not as something they
need to draw on practically at 2 a.m. In our experience, there are a
variety of causes for this—not strong on Unix skills, not strong on
communication, uncomfortable working under time pressure—but
whatever the reason, those people are going to struggle on most
platform teams.
Within your company, you will find the people you’re looking for by
watching what happens during incidents: even when they’re not
paged, they will engage and make the incident remediation much
faster. In the behavioral interview, you should ask about the largest
incident the candidate has been involved in remediating and probe to
be sure they were a significant part of it being resolved.

-- 143 of 630 --

They are comfortable shipping at a deliberate pace.
You can find plenty of brilliant people who love system details and
want free rein to write code to fix user problems ASAP. But while
your platform software engineers will be writing code, they will also
spend time on operations, integrations, and experimentation.
Furthermore, there are large costs to mistakes in platforms, both in
terms of operational risk and the risk of getting stuck supporting
features that are much more expensive to maintain than they were to
create.
An engineer who is strongly motivated by novelty and fast-
turnaround feature building likely will not be a great fit for a mature
platform team. (In Chapter 8, we will talk about how such “pioneers”
are a much better fit in early-stage platforms, when your platform
team needs to partner with product teams and iterate quickly.)
Systems Engineers
Roles around “systems” can be specialized in terms of breadth or depth.
We’ll cover the depth form in the following sections, on reliability
engineers and systems specialists. In our experience, however, a broad
systems engineer is the more common role on successful platform teams, so
we’ll start with that.

-- 144 of 630 --

Almost all platforms benefit from the presence on the team of someone
who, while more focused on understanding systems than writing software,
uses that focus broadly, to understand more than one speciality. True, they
won’t be world experts in performance, Linux, or networking. But because
of their motivation to understand the intricacies of how different types of
systems work and come together, they will know a lot more than most of
your software engineers, and they’ll be a lot more motivated to do work that
involves manipulating systems despite those intricacies.
But what do they do? Well, mainly stuff covered in the SRE and DevOps
literature: lots of automation, particularly for infrastructure integration,
scaling, reliability, and observability configuration. But it doesn’t stop at
automation and configuration. Their broad systems knowledge can be put to
use for building platform features as well—specifically, those arcane
aspects that take a lot of knowledge to get right. This is why, even though
there is a lot of crossover, we prefer not to use the name “DevOps engineer”
or “SRE engineer” for this role. When you have adopted a platform
engineering culture, everyone on the team should be thinking of their work
in terms of features of the platform product, not just its automation or
reliability.
Where systems engineers tend to shine the most is in using their knowledge
to resolve deep systems issues that involve both the platform codebase and
the underlying dependencies. A lot of these issues are operational—we have
seen cases where software engineers left issues languishing for months,

-- 145 of 630 --

lacking the knowledge to make progress, until a systems engineer came
along to help. However, focusing on operational debugging is seeing the
value of the role too narrowly. We’ve also seen a systems engineer rescue a
launch deadline by spotting an easy optimization in OSS configuration,
whereas our software engineers were telling us that fixing the issue would
take months of rewriting code.
Why recognize and hire for a broad systems engineer role rather than
pushing for specialists in particular elements of the system (say, the OSS or
cloud vendor you’re using)? There are three reasons:
Specialization tends to take a long time to achieve, making it hard to hire
systems engineers who aren’t already at “senior” levels of experience.
Strong systems engineers will feel the need to specialize in order to get
promoted, and the team will lose the breadth that is so important to their
contributions.
You don’t want too many specialists, but you need broad systems
engineers.
While systems engineers’ expertise should increase in depth over time in
certain areas, based on what they have worked on, it is a mistake to push
them into that specialization as a career unless your company really needs
that. So, with that in mind, let’s turn to the specialists.
Reliability Engineers

-- 146 of 630 --

Given its popularity in some parts of the industry today, we expect some
readers to believe the “SRE” role captures all the systems work that is not
feature-based “software development.” There are a few problems with that
thinking. First, Google itself split the SRE job into two, differentiating
between software engineers and systems engineers, with both sharing the
same culture but filling different roles. Second, as we highlighted in
Chapter 1, the role of “DevOps engineer” covers a lot of the same skills,
although with a very different culture. This comes back to the fact that
naming matters. A lot of people, including some SREs, think that
“reliability” is all the job should be about, whereas the general systems
engineer role also encompasses support, efficiency, security, performance,
and even adding features.
So, when we use the term “reliability engineer,” we mean those who want
their role to be focused on that, versus more general responsibilities. Now,
that’s not to say the role is unimportant. Many great SRE practices work
much better when led by passionate practicing engineers. These engineers
excel at high-impact incident management, consulting on service level
objectives (SLOs) and chaos engineering, and running game days,
production readiness reviews, rigorous incident postmortems, and even
weekly operational meetings. They have the technical depth to know what
matters and the skill set to implement a lot of the technical stuff behind it,
and so they drive reliability across the organization’s systems.

-- 147 of 630 --

In theory, other engineers could do all this on a part-time basis. But in our
experience, few are willing. The type of people who are motivated to do
this are systems thinkers, those for whom the social dimension of a solution
makes it even more motivating. They tend to ask, “How do we make
everyone a little bit better?”
Take, for example, incident management. In an organization with teams
doing their own on-call rotations, SREs as incident managers can ensure
that thematic issues don’t fall through the cracks. An incident can span
multiple systems, and even if your team owns all of those systems, it’s very
easy for each person or subteam to think only about their portion of the
issue. You need someone to track incidents, alert senior management about
unresolved challenges, and plan and implement ways to remediate those
challenges. This is best done by someone who loves to focus on big broken
things and has the patience to see a project through to completion.
People like this can often be found on platform engineering teams, working
with highly complex technical systems. Usually they start doing this work
part-time, for their own teams. If you want to scale their work up and give
them a broader mandate we have found they typically need to be in a
focused team that stays close to the platform engineering team—something
like a core reliability team. Coworkers sometimes see people in this role as
“talkers who have never done it,” which takes away from their impact. We
recommend rotating reliability specialists in and out of platform teams to
keep their skills current.
,

-- 148 of 630 --

Systems Specialists
Cloud networking engineer. Kernel engineer. Performance engineer.
Storage engineer. At a certain scale, an engineer with depth in any of these
roles can be game-changing. The best specialist can level up an entire
organization’s practices around their speciality, educating even as they do
hands-on work. But it’s a mistake to think that your platform team can just
be a combination of software engineers and systems specialists, and we
encourage you to wait to hire them until the need is clear. When you do
have a need, keep the bar high, and avoid hiring more than a few specialists
until you can clearly see the positive impact of your first round of new
hires.
It takes a fairly large organization to not just want to employ such
specialists full time, but also to give them problems that fully interest and
utilize them. If a big part of your platform’s offering revolves around
networking management, for example, all of your engineering team should
understand the network. But it’s easy to take this too far and end up with a
bunch of people who are too focused on implementing the state-of-the-art
ideas of their specialty and not focused enough on building the thing you
need. We once witnessed a developer tools team made up of version control
experts: instead of focusing on the lack of user-friendly tooling, they spent
all their time refining interfaces to the version control system. Such work
can be important, but when it isn’t the current problem, an overspecialized
team can end up ignoring the bigger picture of what’s needed.

-- 149 of 630 --

Another way we have seen this play out is specialists refusing more general
work. Instead, they want a role we call “specialist as internal evangelist.”
They imagine spending their time contributing to open source projects of no
immediate value to the company, speaking on the conference circuit,
researching obscure new offerings, and perhaps running nice-to-have
internal programs aligned with their speciality. We encourage these
activities for all engineers in moderation, but evangelism is a full-time role
for SaaS vendors—when an engineer tries to make a full-time role of it
internally without having much to show for their expertise, they tend to
struggle for credibility, and so usually undermine the ideas they are trying
to spread.
Hiring and Recognizing Engineers in All
Roles
We understand if you’re feeling a little confused after the last section. Are
you looking for one role, two roles, four roles, or even more? There is no
single answer, because it depends not just on your needs as a platform
engineering team, but also your company’s job families and hiring
processes—what they are today, and how much flexibility there is to change
them.
These days, most of the tech industry’s hiring and promotion processes
greatly favor software engineers who ship a lot of new code to production

-- 150 of 630 --

—their impact on the organization is seen as easy to evaluate. Since their
systems are slower to change, software engineers working on platforms can
struggle to get recognized in company-wide processes, and the three other
roles fare even worse. The organization generates an organ rejection of
talented individuals, usually by hiring them into too-junior positions or
refusing to promote them, all because their impact on the organization is not
as easy to evaluate compared to shipping software.
We’ve had mixed success in dealing with this challenge, for reasons that
involve company culture, our positions within the hierarchy, and the CTO’s
appetite for making and communicating process changes. What we’ve
learned is that success is about positive marginal change—making a case
for incremental changes based on individual cases, while building evidence
for bigger changes in the long run.
With this experience in mind, the next sections lay out our best practices,
which we summarize in Table 4-1.

-- 151 of 630 --

Table 4-1. Engineering roles and best practices in platform engineering teams
Role 	Title 	Interview process Job family/level
matrix
Software
engineer
Prefer
“software
engineer.”
Allow
“platform
software
engineer” only
if unavoidable.
Custom behavioral
interview to cover
fit with the
platform
engineering team.
Common to the
company-wide
role.
Systems
engineer
Allow
specialized,
such as
DevOps
engineer.
Same as for
software engineer,
but more
flexibility in the
coding interview.
Design questions
should cover the
candidate’s
systems breadth.
Common across
the three roles.
Net impact is
the same as
software
engineer.
Differences
emphasize
impact created
less by writing

-- 152 of 630 --

Role 	Title 	Interview process Job family/level
matrix
code, and more
by exercising
distinct
knowledge,
skills and
practices.
Reliability
engineer
Allow
specialized,
such as SRE.
Same as for
systems engineer,
but design
questions should
cover the
candidate’s depth
in SRE.
Systems
specialist
(splits into
many roles)
Allow
specialized
and per-role,
such as kernel
engineer,
performance
engineer, and
storage
engineer.
Same as for
software engineer,
but design
questions should
cover the
candidate’s depth
in their system
speciality.
Allow Role-Specific Titles
The preceding table breaks out three different facets of a role: its title, its
level matrix (usually called a “job family”), and its interview process. We

-- 153 of 630 --

have seen people with a systemizing bent want to systemically link these
together, insisting that everyone in positions that use a certain level matrix
must have the same interview process and must have the same job title.
What could be more simple? And it’s so rational!
The problem is that a job title indicates someone’s specific role, both to
fellow employees and to external stakeholders. There is a personal aspect to
it, especially when someone has built their career around a specialization.
Forcing, say, your first kernel engineer to be called an SRE because that’s
the level matrix you will use not only won’t make sense to their peers but
also demeans their depth of experience, all while introducing a feeling of
bureaucratic rigidity.
While we believe it’s fine to allow role-specific titles, we definitely don’t
embrace the other extreme of everyone getting to choose their own title, as
that will confuse people too. Creating a new title should be done only for
good reasons, in recognition of substantial differences in the new role.
Crucially, this does not need to be coupled with immediately creating a new
level matrix or interview process (we’ll look at when this might be required
in the following sections).
Avoid Creating a New Software Engineer Level
Matrix

-- 154 of 630 --

Standard software engineering job descriptions heavily emphasize creating
new code, systems, and architectures. Platform software engineers are often
ill-served by these definitions, both in the interview process and in the
criteria used to evaluate their performance and readiness for promotion.
They do all these things, but the business criticality of the mature systems
they work on means they do them more slowly. Many organizations
respond to this issue by seeking to create a “platform software engineer”
level matrix, recognizing a platform as a substantially different type of
system whose successful development requires different skills, and so
whose practitioners should be evaluated differently.
However, this problem exists for other specialized software development
roles as well. For example, data engineers, mobile engineers, and frontend
engineers all write software and create new systems (just different types of
systems). So, should they get their own set of job levels, too? It’s tempting
to say yes, but once you’ve written and launched a few job ladders, you
realize that they are expensive to create and even more expensive to
maintain. There’s a technical analogy in the trade-offs of forking code to
support a new use case versus generalizing it to support both. What looks
cheap initially (forking the code/ladder) becomes a long-term maintenance
burden, particularly in the presence of many similar forks.
Because all of these roles are primarily about software development, we
have found the sanest path is keeping all of them together on a single
ladder. To make this work, you will need to specify level criteria in terms of

-- 155 of 630 --

outcomes achieved, as opposed to overly relying on methods used. This can
take time and iteration to get right.
In the meantime, what should you do when you have a great platform
software engineer but can’t get them promoted? We’ve found that you’ll be
much better off stretching within the system, by finding people outside of
platform engineering, at the next level up, who can attest that “this person’s
impact is just as high as mine.” In fact, bringing such cases forward usually
spurs the organization to adjust its level criteria. To support a case for
promotion, Diego Quiroga, principal software engineering manager at
Microsoft, suggests providing evidence of some of the following:
Tools, dashboards, or wikis the engineer has created (particularly those
that are widely adopted within the team or organization)
The quality of their customer interactions, including clarity, technical
depth, and responsiveness
Their contribution to handling and resolving tickets efficiently,
considering volume and complexity
Their involvement in postmortems, ability to coach other teams in
analyzing incidents, and ability to propose solutions
Back up these and any other artifacts with feedback from those on the
receiving end of the engineer’s work products, and prompt for feedback that
speaks to both the impact and the technical expertise needed to do the work
well.

-- 156 of 630 --

Have, at Most, One Level Matrix for the Systems
Roles
In smaller companies, the practice we’ve outlined in the last few sections
works well to hire and reward great software and systems platform
engineers, without needing a second level matrix. However, at scale,
because they don’t write as much code, we have seen challenges in getting
organizations to recognize the commensurate value of people in all the
“systems” roles—reliability engineers, systems engineers, and all the
variants of systems specialists.
A common example: we’ve seen a team interview a great systems engineer
with 10 years of experience on planet-scale systems, then propose to hire
them at a non-senior level “since they can’t solve coding problems like a
senior engineer does.” Similarly, we’ve seen company-wide promotion
committees struggle with how to evaluate senior-level engineers who had
written only a thousand lines of code in the last year, or staff-level
engineers who hadn’t led the building of a new system. The panel was
biased to think of leverage only in terms of new code and systems being
created.
With that in mind, we believe most organizations should eventually create a
second level matrix for the “systems” roles that don’t churn out lots of code.
The key is to create only one, rather than three, or else you’ll again run into
the problem of confusing everyone by codifying subtle differences in how

-- 157 of 630 --

to evaluate impact in similar roles. Since these job titles have seen so much
renaming in recent years, we won’t suggest a new name, but a couple of
examples we’ve seen are Meta’s production engineer level matrix and
Amazon’s systems development engineer level matrix.
Finally, if your company already has a level matrix for DevOps engineers or
SREs, it’s fine to use that. The name won’t be a perfect match, since these
are more specific roles, but as there’s no such thing as a perfect name
anyway it’s OK to avoid the work around renaming—just make sure the
level criteria accommodate all three roles, since otherwise you’ll be limiting
who can be successful on your platform teams.
If Needed, Create a New Software Engineer
Interview Process
Assessing a candidate during an interview and evaluating an employee’s job
performance are totally different beasts. In the case of performance and
promotion, the employee has been doing the job for thousands of hours,
with clear business impact in deliverables and other specific role
information that can put the evaluation in context. Interviews, on the other
hand, provide only a few hours of information, none of which involves
actually doing the job. Thus, “forking” the software engineering interview
process may be the right thing to do.

-- 158 of 630 --

Platform teams at companies that use “company-wide” software
engineering pipelines can get stuck on evaluating an “application software
engineer” profile and miss the differences we covered earlier in the chapter.
For instance, we have seen coding questions that are less about practical
coding skills (creating a solution with high attention to detail, particularly
around assumptions and edge cases) and more about computer science
knowledge that rarely comes up in day-to-day platform programming, such
as data structure manipulation or first-order algorithms. We’ve also seen
bias in design questions, which may be focused on choosing the right
platforms to combine as part of an application, as opposed to designing
platforms themselves. None of these map well to platform software
engineering.
For platform engineering teams, we prefer an interview process that looks
something like this:
One traditional coding interview, typically with an algorithm that has a
working naive/brute-force approach that can then be optimized through
more advanced algorithms or data structures. The candidate is evaluated
not only on whether they can find the optimized solution, but also on
whether they can implement the “bookkeeping” details of the answer,
including error handling and testing.
One coding interview that shows the breadth of the candidate’s
understanding of systems detail. It may take them 20 minutes to get the
code correct, but such questions should generate 30 minutes or more of

-- 159 of 630 --

discussion about the underlying assumptions. During this discussion, you
can test their methodology and their assumptions around real-world
factors like testing, observability, and scale-up; for example, you might
ask how the candidate’s answer would change if the inputs were larger
than what a single computer could handle.
One traditional design interview, but focused on designing a platform, as
opposed to an application.
One inverted design interview, in which you ask the candidate to dive
deep into the technical trade-offs of something real they have designed
and built.
One behavioral/values interview, with a particular focus on operational
experience, ability to lead in the face of conflict, and empathy with
customers.
If any of these types of interviews are new to your company’s process, you
will need to be “hands on” in managing the rollout process to ensure your
early interviewers are calibrated. You’ll want to set up a small working
group to create a set of standard questions to be covered, with a common
rubric or a set of green and red flags. As the process is initially rolled out,
you will need to collect interviewers’ feedback on how well they think the
question evaluated the candidate, and present any trends to the working
group to make further corrections. In our experience, such a hands-on
rollout can take six months before we are confident that the early
interviewers are well calibrated.

-- 160 of 630 --

Vary the Interview Only Slightly for Systems
Roles
As indicated in Table 4-1, for systems roles, we like to use the same
interview outline as for platform software engineers. However, we suggest
three main changes. The first is more flexibility on the design question—the
more you focus on the candidate’s specialization, the more information you
have to evaluate whether they pass the interview and what level they should
be at. The second is, of course, in the inverted design interview: you want to
dive into their depth of systems knowledge in their specific role, ideally
having someone in that role asking the questions.
The third change is the largest point of contention: keeping the coding
interviews. People with systems backgrounds often argue that “Whiteboard
coding isn’t real coding, so I shouldn’t need to do it.” Sometimes they
follow that with “You should trust from my resume that I know how to
code.” Unfortunately, there are many people in the world who can’t actually
create code in existing production systems, including a lot of people whose
resumes would make you think otherwise. This has to be covered in the
interview.
The question, though, is how. People with systems backgrounds often note
that the whiteboard interview process is unnatural and requires practice that
is divorced from normal working conditions. It’s hard to produce
production-quality code for a new problem with the time pressure of a live

-- 161 of 630 --

interview, not to mention the distractions from an interviewer looking over
your shoulder and interrupting you with well-meaning suggestions. The
result is that the candidate’s performance gives no legitimate indication of
how well they will write code once in the job.
We suggest that, instead, you take the question offline, offering the
candidate a time-boxed take-home coding problem. Then, use the interview
to discuss their submission. This allows you to validate that they didn’t
cheat and to go deep on systems questions. This style of interview takes
more time and gets pushback from some candidates, but again, we think it’s
important not to backslide on this point if you really want to build a team
with a platform culture that will create substantial new software, as opposed
to a traditional infrastructure or operational culture.
Interview for Customer Empathy
In our time managing and working with platform engineering organizations,
we’ve seen some organizations develop abrasive relationships with some of
their largest user groups. In certain cases, the engineers treated users’
thoughts and opinions with contempt, even as those users struggled with
problems caused by the platform itself. It’s tempting to dismiss this with
“Don’t hire jerks.” There are two reasons we think this is simplistic.
First, the word jerk implies behavior like belittling, agitating, and ignoring.
That is certainly some of what you see, but it doesn’t cover more defensive

-- 162 of 630 --

behavior, like touchiness around criticism. Here, rather than focusing on
helping the user the best they can, the platform engineers sigh, shrug, and
point fingers at the past. When the team is under a lot of pressure, this can
cause outbursts targeted at users with a clear message of “you users are
lucky to have us.”
Second, the user might be the jerk. There is a reason for the old help-desk
meme of “the problem exists between the keyboard and the chair.” Some
users just cannot accept the facts. Most application engineers are protected
by their support or product organizations, which deal with the worst of such
people directly. However, as we’ll discuss in Chapter 6, when you’re
working on a platform the line between support cases and new features can
be blurred, so user support is part of the job.
Handling difficult users while supporting a system you did not create takes
maturity and empathy to hold your temper, build bridges, educate the user,
and solve the problem. Not everyone can manage it. Unfortunately, this
means there are a lot of passionate platform engineers who aren’t cut out to
work on platforms. Not only does their behavior affect the reputation of the
team, but because they are somewhat “right” in their grievances, they can
easily affect the culture of the entire team.
While there are many skills you might try to interview for to avoid this
problem (negotiation, communication, influence without authority), we

-- 163 of 630 --

recommend that, at a minimum, you screen for a basic level of empathy and
ability to put oneself in the user’s shoes. We have used questions like:
Tell me about a time when you helped one of your users understand the
system.
Tell me about a time when you used customer feedback to change the
direction of what you were building.
How do you understand your users in order to figure out whether a new
feature or system is interesting or applicable to them?
These questions are not meant to see if the engineers would make good
product managers; they make sure engineers appreciate that they are
building things for other humans to consume. Camille prefers to frame this
as customer empathy instead of user empathy because, to paraphrase a
friend, “Customer implies obligations; users are just some schmucks.”
This doesn’t mean that engineers need to spend all their time thinking about
their customers. But when engineers have some empathy for other people
who might need to read their code and a general commitment not just to the
most interesting technical problem but also to the larger health of the
system, the engineers themselves and the team as a whole tend to be
stronger.

-- 164 of 630 --

What Makes a Great Platform
Engineering Manager?
It’s great to have a balanced set of platform software engineers and systems
engineers, but at some point you need to add engineering managers into the
mix. (After all, who’s going to make sure all these interview processes
happen?) Furthermore, the manager is often the leader who has the most
influence on the culture of a team, impacting who feels heard, who feels
enabled, and who feels their ideas are being treated equally to those of
others.
While there are skills all good managers share, we’ve found that some
skills, tendencies, and experiences make for the most successful platform
engineering managers. In this section, we’ll cover the main ones.
Experience Operating Platforms
Platform engineering involves operational complexity that many managers
with application software engineering backgrounds do not appreciate. Most
at least understand the breadth of the underlying systems, but they may miss
that these systems tend to have ill-defined boundaries. A problem in one
area can cause the whole thing to fall apart in surprising ways. Thus, it
requires a lot of humility and patience to manage a team as they slowly yet
diligently address systemic issues. When you bring a software engineering

-- 165 of 630 --

leader without operational skills into a platform management role, they can
compound problems by encouraging a mindset that the solution is just one
“brilliant” engineering fix away. Yes, there are sometimes quick system
fixes that buy time, but these are much more likely to be “simple” than
“brilliant.” For every “brilliant” engineering fix we’ve seen, we’ve seen 10
failed ones that compounded operational problems and slowed the team
down.
A different failure mode we have observed involves hiring a good manager
from a customer organization. This approach has clear upsides—you get an
established manager, a fast path to customer empathy, and organizational
relationship building. However, be cautious, because this hire is likely
coming from a place of less operational complexity. As you’ll see in
Chapter 6, they can struggle to see the value in routine operational
practices, letting things fall through the gaps. Further, they might think that
the underlying system problems are easy to solve and the engineers working
on them were mismanaged and doing things wrong. That’s a great way to
end up not just misdiagnosing problems but also alienating the strongest
members of an existing team.
Experience on Big, Long-Running Projects
Managers who are used to the “move fast and break things” pace of
application engineering may get frustrated by the slower delivery pace of
platform engineering teams. When a lot of people depend on your platform,

-- 166 of 630 --

it is necessarily more critical, and that means you need to make changes
slowly and operate with careful thought.
This doesn’t mean that platform teams shouldn’t aim for frequent delivery.
A good platform engineering leader will help their team figure out how to
deliver their work quickly and safely in the same way that a good
application engineering leader does. But there is a difference between
leading a team that ships new code to production every day, and a team that
has to think through the multi-month process of safely migrating several
customers off of one critical platform and onto another one without
downtime, data loss, or disruption.
Great platform leaders are able both to take criticism related to the team’s
inability to ship improvements faster and to justify why the team’s delivery
pace is right, as they are managing high levels of business criticality,
complexity, and risk. In the face of constant pressure and criticism from
stakeholders, even the most confident leaders can start questioning their
strategy and churn their team’s focus by looking for quick fixes to regain
face. Instead, they must set aside any emotional reaction to the one-way
nature of this feedback, and be willing to spend time and effort on handling
tough discussions with technical stakeholders. We’ll discuss techniques for
building these relationships in depth in Chapter 10.
Attention to Detail

-- 167 of 630 --

The most successful managers that we’ve seen transition from “application
engineering” leadership to “platform engineering” leadership were detail-
oriented sticklers who found motivation in doing project and process
management personally.
Managers who spent their early careers as engineers working in
infrastructure and platform teams tend to know which details matter and
who can be trusted to make the right trade-offs, so they can lead their teams
without using too much management process. But for managers from other
backgrounds, until you have built these instincts, you’ll need to track a lot
of details. This can make teams feel “micromanaged,” which can be
annoying, particularly if former management used less process. However, if
the options are “my leader asks micromanaging questions to understand
trade-offs” and “my leader misses crucial details in making decisions that
impact me,” most engineers will grudgingly admit that they prefer the
former.
Good managers should eventually build the instincts for when to trust the
team and when to probe more deeply, and so become able to put much of
the process aside. This is something actual micromanagers struggle with.
Other Roles on a Platform Team

-- 168 of 630 --

Of course, a good platform team includes more roles than just various kinds
of engineers. This section briefly covers some other roles you may
encounter.
Product Managers
Good platform teams focus on the product and the customer. As we lay out
in Chapter 5, building products that reflect this mindset takes ongoing
detailed and focused work, particularly around communicating with
customers and building that into a strategy. At scale, adding dedicated
product managers to your platform group is the only way to ensure this
work will be done.
It’s a challenge to hire good product managers anywhere, but it’s especially
hard for platform teams. Most product management organizations see value
in the role as closely tied to revenue and to delivering to external customers,
so few PMs are experienced in the challenges of platform teams. This
means they can sometimes take the short-term mindset of “business
obsession” too far. Jordan West, a staff engineer on a data platform team at
one of the FAANG companies, captures his negative experience with PMs
who think this way: “Why is it so bad if engineers get interrupted every 10
minutes and can’t deliver on anything else, as long as the customer is
happy?” That can be a useful mindset for a startup, but it’s dysfunctional on
a platform team.

-- 169 of 630 --

To address this challenge, platform teams can turn to product-minded
people from other technical backgrounds to fill some of these roles. Our
experience is that, for every PM we’ve worked with who came in with
formal product management experience, we’ve worked with two others
who moved into product management from engineering or, occasionally,
technical program roles. While hiring people without formal product
management experience is a gamble, it’s one that often pays off.
However, while it can be tempting to fill your product teams with only these
folks, you also need some experienced product managers who already
understand the role. They can help to train the newbies and calibrate
whether they are doing product management or just glorified program
management, scrum mastering, or tech leading. You can bootstrap this
through external coaching and training, but don’t skip this step entirely!

-- 170 of 630 --

WHAT HAPPENS WHEN YOU CAN’T HIRE PRODUCT MANAGERS?
What do you do if you aren’t allowed to hire product managers (for
instance, if that role is only for external-facing teams in your organization),
or just can’t find the right person? Even when there are potential internal
transfers from engineering this can be an issue, since at many companies
their lack of experience in the new role would mean a pay cut.
Engineering managers and project managers can be helpful here, but you
have to be careful. While the engineering manager role requires a lot of
communicating with customers, it is usually focused on execution rather
than product. Further, it’s common for engineering managers to struggle
with the workload of their other responsibilities. TPMs have similar
challenges: they are often unused to conversations about ambiguous long-
term and short-term trade-offs, so they tend to treat product problems as
ones of execution, to be scoped, stack ranked, and solved as quickly as
possible.
Our best successes have been with staff engineers. Perhaps a quarter of staff
engineers are strong two-way communicators invested in doing what is
right for the business. When they talk to customers, they listen, internalize
the feedback, and look for incremental solutions, even if those take them
away from building their ideal “next big thing.” We don’t mean to imply the
other three-quarters are bad staff engineers, just that they lack the strengths
to personally take on product management responsibilities, so ideally you
would partner them with a PM.

-- 171 of 630 --

So, if you find yourself unable to hire product managers, your best move is
usually to identify, empower, and reward the staff engineers who can wear
both hats. To learn more about this role, we recommend Tanya Reilly’s
book The Staff Engineer’s Path (O’Reilly).
Product Owners
Thanks to the Scaled Agile Framework, a lot of companies today are hiring
a role called product owner. There’s some ambiguity about how this differs
from a product manager role. It’s sometimes defined as a complement to a
marketing-focused product management role, emphasizing the work of
backlog grooming and defining user stories. In platform engineering
organizations, where all the “customers” are internal and so marketing
needs are small, there is no reason to split the roles. Look for people who
can make strategic decisions and handle the mechanics of action.
Project Managers/Technical Program Managers
The project or technical program manager (TPM) role is often the most
vilified role in engineering organizations. Critics argue that the “technical”
part of the title is a misnomer, since every decision involves big meetings of
stakeholders, and otherwise the job seems to mainly involve harassing
overworked managers and tech leads for updates. We think this is less about
the role and more about the conditions they are often asked to deliver in—
2

-- 172 of 630 --

when executives don’t prioritize the right projects ahead of time, it creates a
situation where the only way a project will succeed is by a TPM driving
brute-force cross-organization execution. To avoid these situations, we
recommend hiring product managers first and using engineering managers
and technical leads to manage all small- to medium-sized projects.
But no matter how hard your executives and PMs try, no one can predict the
future, so broad, execution-focused projects are going to happen. Managing
those projects well will require 100% of someone’s time, and it’s a good
idea to make it someone who has built their career on doing that.
Finding good platform TPMs is almost as difficult as finding good PMs. We
have seen a lot of candidates who had succeeded at their last company
totally fail at their new one. The lesson we’ve learned is to find TPMs who
are comfortable delivering on projects using the organization-wide
processes you have today, rather than blaming those processes for why they
can’t. Thus, at a relatively small company, you will want people who are
good at making things happen by building bottom-up relationships with
engineers and delivering without needing authority. On the other hand, at a
big company with tens of thousands of engineers, you likely will want
someone who makes things happen by bringing hard decisions to
misaligned leadership, collecting the details and communicating them
upwards in the style your company’s executives prefer.

-- 173 of 630 --

Developer Advocates, Technical Writers, and
Support Engineers
Developer advocates, technical writers, and support engineers are highly
specialized roles seen in really big platform engineering organizations
(generally, those with more than a thousand engineers). Both product
managers and engineers can perform these functions to some degree
(though not as well as a specialist), so avoid hiring until your team really
needs a full-time specialist. This usually means pushing back against “not
my job” attitudes from your team. It also means ensuring such work is
recognized and rewarded, even when it is not directly mentioned in their
job’s level matrix.
Creating a Platform Engineering Team
Culture
We started this chapter by talking about how some teams get stuck with one
type of engineer (systems or software) and struggle to create the balanced
culture that platform engineering needs. Now, we want to talk about a case
where we brought together two teams with divergent cultures and instilled
the culture needed to do platform engineering.

-- 174 of 630 --

A Platform Split Between a Development and an
SRE Team
This was a compute platform whose core was a complex OSS system, with
the platform cobbled together by a development team of software engineers
who were mostly recent PhDs, although in systems-related fields. All of
these had been hired according to a company-wide “software engineer”
interviewing standard—which means none were screened for systems
operational skills or customer empathy. The platform team had recently
added a few systems engineers, but they’d been hired into a separate “SRE”
organization, which was the by-the-book approach of the time. Their most
common manager, three levels up, knew he had a problem, but he was
hearing very different proposals about what needed to be addressed.
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Development
Team
The development team’s culture held that every problem could be solved by
growth—building new functionality in collaboration with customers to
allow them to move to the new platform, which would later allow the team
to hire more engineers. They didn’t worry about broad customer
understanding, migration plans (other than “build it and they will come”),
improving the operational stability of some of the systems, or solving
problems through evolving the existing offerings. Instead, at every

-- 175 of 630 --

opportunity, the team immediately went into “new build” mode, thinking
this was going to be the “brilliant” solution that all future customers would
use.
This had certain advantages. The team created some very innovative
solutions. They weren’t afraid to tackle problems with the OSS that no one
in the community had solved yet, instead of deciding that the OSS wasn’t fit
for purpose due to the lack of support for their needs. Their fearlessness in
the face of unsolved problems helped them knock down barriers and deliver
some really big advances, and they didn’t get bogged down in the
formalities of process while delivering.
As you can probably guess, however, it had some big drawbacks too. There
were many stability problems with these new systems, which the engineers
often preferred to solve via a new build instead of taking the time to
understand and fix the existing infrastructure. The innovative solutions
were great for getting the ball rolling, but the team seemed stuck in
“pioneer” mode. Perhaps due to the influence of the researchers in the
group, they were less interested in the day-to-day grind of stability,
reliability, and iterative improvements. Eventually, project delivery and
broad customer communication suffered. The customers weren’t clear when
they could expect things to get done, so they weren’t happy.
The creation of the separate SRE team, which was undersized and mostly
staffed with newcomers to the company, just made things worse. The

-- 176 of 630 --

development team started to view reliability as “SRE’s problem” and a
license to stay on the same path, despite significant technical debt. The
finger-pointing was more covert than overt, but the thinking on both sides
was “Why is that other team not hiring better people who meet the needs of
the business?”
Merging the Teams and Adding Product
Management
Our first move was to merge the teams under someone from the SRE side
with great managerial traits and strong experience operating platforms,
executing on long-running projects, and managing stakeholders. The new
team balanced people who wanted to build new things with those who were
happy to scale and operate existing things and those who would work more
closely with customers. As a result, over a period of about six months, they
stabilized operationally and consolidated the prioritization around new
features, partly by moving well away from the “one engineer, one feature”
model toward a roadmap model.
These changes didn’t come for free. We lost some of the more innovative
research-focused developers: they had preferred the SRE model, as it let
them focus on playing with new technologies and building new things.
Mostly, we saw their unhappiness growing and were able to move them to
more appropriate roles in other parts of the company. But for a couple, we

-- 177 of 630 --

didn’t move fast enough, and we lost some good engineers who just ended
up stuck on the wrong team.
The next step was finding a PM to take over product management for the
team. This too created some tension; we had to ensure that the technical
leads still felt heard and that the engineering managers wouldn’t be (or feel)
undermined by the product manager making all the big decisions. Bringing
such a disparate group together while ensuring everyone feels respected and
able to do their best work is not easy.
Instilling a Platform Engineering Culture
As these moves were made, an important aspect of our role as organization
leaders was reinforcing the new culture. That was harder than we expected,
as cultural challenges also came from outside the team. Part of the reason
the development team had been empowered was their strong alignment with
the broader company culture, which was largely about collaboratively
building innovative things on the cutting edge. This culture was great for
data scientists whose work had no human users. But the business had other
other application teams with much higher reliability needs, and even the
data scientists were unhappy with an unreliable platform.
Thus, we needed a platform team that balanced building new things with
thinking about stability, reliability, and usability. We needed to create a new
platform engineering culture that respected the overall company values of

-- 178 of 630 --

innovation and collaboration while adding our balanced focus on stability
and scale.
In truth, most subteams at larger companies have their own distinct cultures,
and the larger the company, the more these cultures tend to diverge. Teams
develop cultures that reflect where they focus their attention and how they
are punished or rewarded, and platform teams’ cultures tend to be a bit
more conservative than those of their product engineering counterparts.
Platform engineering leaders should pay close attention to any culture drift
and ensure that it doesn’t lead to an “us versus them” mindset. It’s OK for
your team to have a slightly distinct culture, but when your pride in running
highly reliable systems turns into scorn at the product engineering teams
who keep shipping broken code, you risk destroying the customer empathy
that is so important in building great platforms in the first place.
To create a healthy organization, spend time recognizing and rewarding
different roles and skill sets. Talk about how they contribute to the stronger,
better whole. Take the time to appreciate your partner teams and their work.
This cultural investment will go a long way toward supporting your team
and ensuring their (and your) continued success. The next step forward is
creating a product culture, which is the topic of the next chapter.
Wrapping Up

-- 179 of 630 --

In the first part of this book, we emphasized that platform engineering
requires a cultural change in how you staff teams, bringing together
engineers with a mix of focus areas to collaborate on customer-focused
platforms. Mixed-mode management is not easy, though, so it’s tempting
for platform leaders early in their leadership careers, or early in their
migration to platform engineering, to fall back on what they know—which
results in teams with either a software or a systems focus. Unfortunately,
that usually means the platforms they produce lack either the complex
analysis that systems engineers bring or the code development productivity
that software engineers bring. The platform product ends up being defined
by what the team can produce, rather than what the customers need.
In this chapter, we not only introduced you to the breadth of roles that a
platform engineering team needs to have at scale, but also to how to think
about your processes of hiring and recognition so that the people in each
role can flourish. We also covered the characteristics leaders need to
successfully manage platform teams and gave an example of how to bridge
the cultural gaps, not just within the team itself, but also in the expectations
customer engineers have in interacting with the team. Because culture is
such a major contributing factor to your success, it runs through nearly
every topic in this book, and we’ll talk about it quite a bit more in
Chapter 5.
This change is not easy to implement. But if you want to move past
operating over-general OSS and vendor primitives held together with in-

-- 180 of 630 --

house tools and glue, you need to start your platform engineering journey
by ensuring your teams are staffed to actually build platforms.
See for instance Laurent Bernaille and Elijah Andrews’s 2022 talk on this.
Like “product owner” versus “product manager,” the difference in these titles in terms of role is
subtle, especially as usage varies across the industry. We will use the terms interchangeably.
1
2

-- 181 of 630 --

Chapter 5. Platform as a Product
What’s an internal platform but an external platform being built in a
hypoxic, lightless, dungheap of an environment?
—Coda Hale
The idea of taking a product approach when building internal technology
has become increasingly popular. Unfortunately, like with so many fads in
the technology industry, many people who try to adopt this approach have
no idea what it actually means, and end up taking the most literal
interpretation to solving the problem—which, in the case of platform
engineering, means they add a bunch of product managers to the team.
While we agree that product managers are important, there’s a lot more to
building a product-oriented platform organization than just hiring a few
PMs. Because there are also some companies that actively resist having PMs
for internal products, we’ve written this chapter so that it’s relevant
regardless of whether you have a formal internal product management team.
This chapter is for anyone who wants to get their platform organization to
adopt a product mindset and apply product management techniques. We
start with a deep dive on culture, focusing on customers (or users—we apply
the terms interchangeably to mean the people who actually consume your
products to do their jobs), because step 1 is to understand the people you’re
building these platforms for and how to interact with them as customers

-- 182 of 630 --

rather than stakeholders. Then, we talk about product discovery and
evolution. With platforms, you will find that many of the best product ideas
come from your engineers and engineers in other parts of the company, so
identifying new products is often a process of finding a small prototype that
could expand to be broadly useful.
For your existing products, we’ll discuss strategies for moving them
forward, and knowing when to either evolve the offerings or rethink them
entirely. We’ll also describe how to validate that there is a ready audience
for your proposed new product offerings, and how to measure success.
Next, we’ll explain how to put all this theory into practice, turning your
collection of related technologies into a product vision, strategy, and
roadmap that your customers can reference to understand your goals and
planned deliverables. We’ll finish the chapter by looking at some of the
common failure modes we’ve seen here—because this is a big shift for
many teams, there are a lot of ways to stumble that we hope to help you
avoid.
Product management practices could fill an entire book, but we hope that by
the end of this chapter you’ll have a broad understanding of the foundations
and how to use them to define and deliver platforms that meet your
customers’ needs.
Product Culture Focuses on the Customer

-- 183 of 630 --

Whether you’re in a big, established company trying to adopt product
management as part of a platform engineering shift or a small startup hoping
to build it in early, the first step to creating a product culture is
understanding and appreciating your customers. If you want to build good
products, you need to build them for someone. But internal customers are
tricky to understand. They are people you can talk to every day, but that
doesn’t mean they can describe what they want you to build. They may be
passive consumers who only complain when things are broken, or active
competitors who want to build their own platforms. They are your
colleagues as well as your customers, and you want to keep them happy, but
that doesn’t mean doing everything they tell you to do.
No matter who you are building your platform for, it’s important to view
them as customers (not stakeholders) so you can build a product that meets
their needs. After all, a business would never just make customers use its
product, so why would we expect to take that approach with our internal
systems? In this section, we’ll explore the various characteristics of internal
customers and discuss how to engage and empathize with them in order to
foster a collaborative relationship that results in a successful platform.
NOTE
Engineering leadership also needs to update incentives and focus areas in order to make this shift;
while hiring strong product managers is helpful, the engineering team’s behavior will make or break
your efforts to build good products.

-- 184 of 630 --

Characteristics of Internal Customers
Having an internal customer base can cause blind spots in your
understanding of whether your products are successful, and catering to
customers who may undervalue your work or take it for granted can create
added friction. To manage this environment effectively, you need to
understand the kind of customer you’re working with, their unique
expectations, and the challenges you will likely face. Let’s take a look at
some of the key characteristics of internal customers:
Small customer base
Platform product decision making is something of a unique
discipline. When many people think about product managers, the
image that springs to mind is a PM for a large consumer-facing
product. Metrics, metrics, metrics! A/B tests and user studies and key
performance indicators (KPIs) and design sprints and revenue
models! Indeed, any time you are building products for a large user
base, all of this is a factor, and PMs for AWS probably have a lot of
metrics to guide them. But A/B testing for an audience of hundreds
might not teach you much. When you’re building a platform for
internal customers at a small to midsize company, adopting a metrics-
driven strategy is harder. This doesn’t mean that there are no metrics
to apply, but you need to be thoughtful about how and what you

-- 185 of 630 --

measure to ensure you are capturing real signals. We will discuss how
to find these signals later in the chapter.
Captive audience
Not only might you have a small group of customers, but you often
have a captive audience, meaning the platform product your team
offers is the customers’ only option (they can’t go off and build their
own). You can ask internal customers what they want or how they
like your platform products, but they may not want to complain to
their colleagues. Platform products also suffer from the problem that
some engineers always think they could build something better, if
only they had the time, so you likely have a customer segment that
seems to never be satisfied no matter how hard you work.
There are two main failure modes in working with captive audiences.
In one, you ignore adoption metrics entirely and fail to see that
you’ve built a platform product that is useful for only a small subset
of your customer base until it’s too late. This can lead to the problem
of several overlapping half-finished products built as “obvious”
offerings that didn’t fit the needs of a majority of customers. In the
other failure mode, you look at adoption as the only important metric,
and use it as a stick to force your customers to adopt a system that
doesn’t work for them. Having a captive audience doesn’t excuse you
from the work of building something they need and want.

-- 186 of 630 --

Conflicting incentives
In extreme cases, your internal customers may also be the ones
“paying” for your team to exist. This can lead to customers who think
more about what they could do with the budget you are using and less
about what they want in a platform product, especially if the product
you are providing is something they are forced to use and don’t
appreciate. Your customer teams may expect you to build bespoke
features precisely for their demands, or to loan them developers to
integrate your platform into their systems.
Customer happiness is a moving target
Because so much of what you build makes hard things easy, or
removes a need entirely, internal customers can forget about the
improvements you have made soon after you make them. This leads
to a cycle where your customers never seem satisfied; the minute you
remove one bottleneck, they focus on the next, and sometimes it’s not
until the entire flow sees a front-to-back improvement that they are
able to appreciate the work you’re doing. Furthermore, new
customers are always coming into the company as new engineers are
hired, and they start with a fresh set of expectations. If things aren’t
as good as these new hires believe they should be, it doesn’t matter
how much better they are today than they were a year ago. And let’s
not forget that most people don’t appreciate the complexity of making

-- 187 of 630 --

all of this stuff work, and they take it for granted until something
breaks—customer satisfaction is often simple indifference.
Customers as competitors
Finally, sometimes internal customers behave like competitors. Yes,
you read that right. When your customers are engineers and you
aren’t able to keep up with what they want, they might build the thing
they need rather than trying to coordinate with you to get the work
done. Staying ahead of what they need and making it clear to them
that it’s better to occasionally wait for your team to provide a solution
than for them to rush ahead and build their own is part of the
difficulty of working with this customer base.
Collaborating with Internal Customers
So, you have a tricky internal customer base made up of your colleagues and
friends (or enemies). This raises another challenge that a product approach
must overcome: existing internal collaboration habits.
If you have built software for internal users, particularly nontechnical users,
you will be familiar with the relationship model of interaction. This comes
about when a team is under pressure to deliver software quickly to solve a
business problem. Management, faced with the challenge of negotiating
delivery timelines, doesn’t also want to argue about whether the features
they’re being asked to build are the right ones. The engineers therefore end

-- 188 of 630 --

up focusing on building exactly what the customer asks for as quickly as
possible, to strengthen the relationship between the team and the customer
base and keep their stakeholders satisfied. If the only thing that matters is
pleasing that one customer group, taking risks to build things they did not
specifically ask for can seem pointless. And the fewer people you are trying
to please, the more likely you are to just do whatever they want so that you
can shield yourself from blame should the system you build end up not
solving the problem at hand.
As you can probably tell, we’re not entirely sold on this model, even when
building for nontechnical customers. It’s even worse when applied to
platform engineering teams. Using a pure relationship model to build for
other engineering teams—building exactly what they tell you they want to
make them happy—sets both of you up for failure. Many engineering teams
don’t precisely know what they want. Even if you build exactly what they
request, they might not adopt it. When they don’t, despite having said they
wanted it, guess who gets blamed? You do. They’ll say you didn’t
implement it quickly enough, you didn’t prioritize the right things, or
they’ve moved on to other concerns and don’t have time to adopt this new
thing.
It’s almost impossible to take a pure relationship approach to other
engineering team customers, because they suffer from the same problems all
engineering teams do: they don’t know how long things will take, they have
1

-- 189 of 630 --

a bad idea of what their future selves will care about, and they haven’t really
thought about the problem that carefully.
Moreover, engineering platforms are not just collections of features that
have been built up over time, request by request. They need to serve many
similar but not identical customers across your company. These customers
will all be very opinionated about things that may not matter for platform
success, and to get a broadly useful platform you’ll need to learn how to
look beyond specific customer needs to the generalizable problem to be
solved.
This is why product management for platforms is not just stakeholder
management. Relationship-based product decision making assumes that you
can get away with following people’s expressed preferences and get to a
good place for your systems. The reality is that when the usability of the
system really matters (which is the case in many, if not all, developer
platforms), success requires you to identify the customers’ revealed
preferences, meaning the way people actually use the systems and the tasks
they perform, rather than the things they say they need or want. You need to
understand what they are actually doing and derive plans based on this
understanding, instead of relying solely on the customers to tell you what to
build.
When you approach customers to ask about their needs, then, be thoughtful
about how you ask the questions. Almost every customer will agree that

-- 190 of 630 --

they want the best, fastest, most scalable offering, so if you ask them “Do
you want a system that is near real time?” they will probably say yes.
Platform engineers sometimes use this line of questioning to justify building
a more elaborate initial offering, which leads to long-running projects and
even failed delivery. By asking more specific questions (such as “How
quickly do you need to be able to do X while using this system?”), you can
determine what is absolutely necessary for customer success, and you often
find a design that is much easier to deliver while still meeting their needs.

-- 191 of 630 --

STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT VERSUS PRODUCT MANAGEMENT
Why isn’t internally facing product management the same thing as
stakeholder management? After all, your stakeholders are probably just a
subset of your customers—perhaps the most important ones or the leaders of
customer teams. So if you make your customers happy, you should be
making your stakeholders happy, and vice versa. Right?
In reality, we find that stakeholder management is as much an exercise in
horse trading, power structure appreciation, and CYA (covering your…
angles), as it is about deciding what to build. You can have excellent
stakeholder management and build crappy products and systems, as many
internal teams prove. Stakeholders can be left with a vague sense that they
don’t like what they’ve been given, but that they somehow signed off on
what was delivered, and so they are part of the problem in a way they don’t
quite understand. Stakeholder management, at its extreme, is a political act

-- 192 of 630 --

that works the company power structure effectively in order to protect the
interests of the leader in question.
Product management is not about making the most important person happy.
Product management is about figuring out what the company actually needs,
based on a deep understanding of current circumstances and future
demands, and shaping the product features and offerings to meet those needs
effectively, in measurable ways. Product management is risky because you
are making bets about what to build to make an impact, which is why
identifying and tracking impact metrics is so important. These metrics will
also help you explain to stakeholders why you are making these bets; if the
investments don’t pan out, at least they’ll understand the reasoning behind
them.
Stakeholder management is a big job, and we will discuss some approaches
to this challenge in Chapter 10. However, it is cynical to assume that
because there are so many obvious technical elements to manage in the
platform, and because the internal customers can’t provide large-scale user
metrics, you can get away with just managing to stakeholders and driving
your platform without user-focused product management. There is room,
and need, for both of these practices, and we believe that you must invest in
each in order to run a successful team.
Empathizing with Customers

-- 193 of 630 --

In Chapter 4, we noted that the two major groups of engineers in your team
will have different motivators. Your software engineers will want to write a
lot of new code, and they’ll often want to chase the newest technologies.
Your systems engineers, on the other hand, will usually prefer to make
small, safe changes to products in their operational comfort zone. Bringing
these groups together to build platform products that customers will love
means you’ve got to get the whole team to appreciate that their success
relies on more than the latest and greatest technology and/or efficient
operation of existing offerings. How do you do this? By centering the team’s
focus on the people who will use the technology, rather than on the
technology itself, and developing a culture of customer empathy.
Customer empathy is something you can coach and develop in your team,
starting with your own behavior. What do you talk about, celebrate, hire for,
and reward? There are opportunities around every corner to reinforce this
mindset:
Interview for empathy when evaluating candidates for “values fit,” as we
discussed in Chapter 4.
Set quarterly or yearly goals that are not just about technical delivery but
that include customer-focused metrics such as adoption, satisfaction, and
engagement.
Bring users to your all-hands or team meetings to share how they are
using your products, offer honest feedback about the problems they are
facing, and give kudos for things that are going well.

-- 194 of 630 --

Have your product managers present user research and feedback to the
team regularly.
Have engineers participate in customer support to observe common pain
points.
You should reinforce this culture of customer empathy through goal setting.
Platform teams without a captive audience may complain about adoption as
a goal, rightly pointing out that they can’t force users to adopt their
products; meanwhile, teams with a captive audience may blame their users
for slow growth in adoption, citing lack of engagement or other priorities.
Both of these reactions lead to the question: Are you building things that
people want? How do you know? How are you making it as easy as possible
for people to adopt your offerings? Do you know what the potential
customer base looks like, and are you being realistic about who needs and
wants this offering? Asking your engineers to measure their success through
the eyes of their customers shakes them out of a purely technical mindset
and refocuses them on the experience, use cases, and purpose of their
systems. Some basic questions to start with include:
If your system is supposed to make people more productive, how much
time do you think this change will save your users? It’s surprising how
many teams claim to improve productivity but neglect to measure what
they are planning to improve!
How many hours a year do your customers have to spend to keep using
this platform (through reacting to upgrades, migrations, etc.)? This can

-- 195 of 630 --

help you spot unattended pain points and friction.
Are your support requests about common repeated issues or unusual
situations? The easier the system is to use, and the better your
documentation/self-service/error messages, the more likely it is that the
support questions will fall on the “unusual” side.
Over time, you can use customer satisfaction (CSAT) or net promoter score
(NPS) surveys to track customer sentiment; when done well, these provide a
high-level trending view of how your customers are experiencing your
products, and comments can be mined for specific target areas.
You can also encourage customer-focused empathy through the content you
choose to highlight in team meetings, as mentioned previously. So much of
leadership is repetition and showing people your values through this
repetition; using your team meetings to emphasize the customer experience
and feedback helps to set the expectation of customer focus. When people
get shout-outs for great customer support, when they hear positive feedback
from the users on the products they’ve built, and when you make a show of
bragging about the uptick in adoption of the latest offering, you encourage
that focus in your team.
Finally, when your challenge is usability and reliability of the systems,
nothing creates empathy for internal customers like putting your team on a
customer support rotation. Seeing where customers are struggling to use
your products is a valuable reminder that the things that are obvious to you

-- 196 of 630 --

are not obvious to others; it’s also a good way to hammer in that people
generally do not read documentation, stack traces, or previously-asked
questions, and so the easier your system is to use without needing to consult
these sources the better your support rotation will be. Many consumer
startups have everyone do a round or two of customer support work in order
to better understand their customers, and we think having your engineers do
at least occasional support for their products is priceless for developing a
better understanding of these products and how they are experienced by
their users. (For more on this, see Chapter 6.)

-- 197 of 630 --

EVERYONE ENGAGES WITH THE CUSTOMERS
One final note on developing a product culture: as teams add product
managers to the mix, we sometimes see engineers pull back from their
customer relationships. Yes, product managers strive to act as the voice of
the user, to forge close relationships with the users, and to ensure that
engineering is building things that people want. But this doesn’t mean that
they can or should completely cut out engineering partners from user
engagements. There will be times when engineering needs to represent the
work to the customers directly, particularly in cases where the technical
implementation details are important to the timeline of the platform product.
It’s OK for product managers to step aside when they are not the experts,
and they shouldn’t let their engineering partners offload all communication
onto them. A product culture means that everyone has some responsibility
for engaging with users to make sure that the best products are being built. It
would be a step backward to remove all preexisting customer interactions
from your engineering team just because you hired a product manager; there
should be a rebalancing and enhancement, but everyone should remain
involved.
Escaping the Feature Shop Trap to Serve
Customers More Broadly

-- 198 of 630 --

All of the challenges of dealing with internal customers come to a head in
what we call the Feature Shop Trap. This arises when platform teams end up
doing nothing but triaging feature requests across their customers, instead of
forcing the compromises necessary to deliver a more strategic product
roadmap.
Let’s take the example of a cloud enablement platform. Anyone who has
built out a cloud platform team knows that a lot of infrastructure engineering
work is needed to test out and start using new cloud services, particularly
when you have security or regulatory concerns to deal with. A scrappy early
version of a cloud platform may have the platform team on the critical path
of unblocking every new cloud service, and at first this might be OK due to
low demand or a limited customer base. Plus, it feels great to be the team
that helps others get to the cloud, so the engineers don’t mind.
But what happens when there’s a huge spike in demand—perhaps a
company-wide push for cloud migration? The platform teams go into triage
mode and prioritize their work to enable the most commonly requested
cloud products first, in order to satisfy the largest groups of customers. They
may think this triage is temporary and they’ll soon get back to the strategic
roadmap, but they often get stuck in enablement request Tetris with no end
in sight.
Why does this happen? The power of the internal customer relationships and
stakeholder politics start to dominate the platform product. Ignoring any

-- 199 of 630 --

customer group entirely is seldom wise, and there are always some who
punch above their relative team size, for whatever reason. So, you find
yourself pulled off to enable a specialty service for some customer group,
because their business heads are Very Important and they want that service
Now. Do this once and everyone starts to wonder why you aren’t prioritizing
their special requests, so you try to prioritize the work by implementing
some sort of fair share algorithm: maybe the leaders of each major customer
group pick what they want to prioritize, maybe it’s determined by some
proportion of each team’s contribution to your own team’s budget, or maybe
some other scheme is dreamed up. Suddenly, your product management
time is entirely spent picking and justifying each piece of work, with no
time to figure out how to escape from this situation.
This challenge is not unique to cloud enablement platforms, and there are
two mistakes that lead into this trap. The first is the pressure to scale product
adoption before the platform architecture is ready to meet additional
demand. The second is assuming that, because the customers are precise in
their requests, the best response is to faithfully comply with those requests.
These mistakes feed on one another. When you have a platform that people
need and want, but that isn’t yet built to allow customers to self-service and
customize for their applications, the customers are going to bring you
specific requirements that they need to unblock their applications. Each
specific requirement may seem small enough, but over time they add to the
platform’s complexity and entrench the current architecture. The customers

-- 200 of 630 --

get used to providing requirements and waiting for the platform team to
unblock them, and there’s enough adoption now that it’s hard to justify
slowing down these specific requests to make the platform more self-
service.
Good platforms provide a stable surface that customers can build on top of;
you want your customers to build the pieces that are specific to their
applications and the platform team to build the common components. To
achieve this, you have to look at feature requests and think about the
patterns they represent. How can the platform evolve so that categories of
features can be unlocked by the customers themselves, rather than making
them wait for your team? Don’t be afraid to prioritize this further-reaching
strategic work instead of directly responding to every customer feature
request.
You don’t have to be a product manager to do this; you can simply be a lazy
engineer. Do you really want to have to implement variants of the same
thing over and over again for every customer? If you were an engineer using
this platform, would you want to have to wait for the platform team to
implement specific features for you before you could move on? Probably
not, right? So how can you approach your offering to allow others to plug
their code in, so that while your platform is supporting them, it’s not doing
the implementation entirely for them?

-- 201 of 630 --

Before you release a new platform product, think about how the customer
demands will follow its successful adoption and where these demands will
create a lot of one-off work for your platform team. What should the
platform support its users building for themselves, and what should it
provide for everyone? This could be engineering tasks like upgrading
versions of the underlying software, and sometimes it will be product
features, like providing notifications, billing, metrics, or user administration.
A good platform takes on and gets rid of common tasks for many customers,
rather than providing bespoke implementations for a few. If you can’t find
the common thread in your new feature requests, is the common thread that
you haven’t made it possible for your customers to solve a class of problems
for themselves? Your goal should be that most new feature requests bring
about a solution that helps this customer and also future customers, with few
one-off bespoke demands that require negotiation.
Product Discovery and Market Analysis
We’ve talked about why internal customers can be tricky to work with, and
how you have to create a culture that puts itself in the customers’ shoes and
thinks about what they need, not just what they’re asking for.
But how do you actually decide what to work on? How do you find platform
products to build? Some of your products may be obvious, at least at a high
level (build, test, and deployment tools; compute and storage orchestration;

-- 202 of 630 --

fully embedded observability and monitoring tools; evolutions of widely
adopted platform products built earlier in the company’s history), but you’ll
need to narrow down exactly what you will work on within these broad
areas. With a product focus, your goal is to identify what your users actually
need and want, and which opportunities will make the biggest difference to
them.
In this section, we’ll talk about identifying products, applying best-effort
estimates to what you believe the impact of this work will be, and putting
metrics in place to show whether you have achieved a measurable impact.
Identifying Potential Platform Products
There are a few tried and true ways to identify new platform product areas
to develop. Many of these arise from partnerships with internal teams,
instead of incubation within the platform engineering team itself. Platform
engineering teams are usually not on the cutting edge of innovation, but
rather play the role of settlers and town planners, taking ideas that have been
successfully pioneered by smaller groups and expanding them to broad
usefulness (we’ll discuss these roles further in Chapter 8). The culture that
you want to encourage is one where you look for the best product ideas that
meet customer needs, without getting too attached to where these ideas
came from.
Assimilate and expand

-- 203 of 630 --

You don’t have a huge customer base to test things on, so how do you find a
successful platform product? Don’t be ashamed to take over a system from a
team that built it with themselves in mind, if that system seems to be the
right general concept for the wider company. A lot of platform teams don’t
like doing this, because they worry they’ll have to live with other people’s
decisions and their consequences. They forget that when you take a product
from a team that built it, you already have a reasonably satisfied customer
base to start with! For better or worse, someone showed that they had a
problem, and they solved it; you wouldn’t be taking it over if you didn’t
think this problem was worth solving in a holistic fashion, right?
Camille did this when she built a global service discovery solution long ago.
Another team had first identified the problem and created their own version
of a solution using ZooKeeper. The solution was fine for their needs, but it
didn’t solve the general needs of everyone at the company for global
scaling. So, she took over the idea of the project and turned it into true
platform infrastructure, built for a big company and not just one team
therein. There were plenty of product decisions to make as part of that work,
but the core identification of the problem as worth solving was done for her.
There is a lot of interesting work involved in taking a solution that is locally
optimized and turning it into something that can be used by a diverse set of
applications.
Partner to prototype

-- 204 of 630 --

Another way to identify promising new opportunities is to partner with
another team, and perhaps even embed someone in that team, to understand
a problem better. A benefit of building a culture of empathy and
collaboration is that partner teams are likely to come by and ask if you are
planning to build something to solve their various problems. When you
believe that what they want provides a specific example of something that
will become a general pattern, take advantage of this request to learn more!
Having platform engineers build an application with a prototype idea for a
platform within it and then using the lessons from that project to extract a
more general system is a productive way to quickly iterate an idea into
something that is usable. After all, the hardest part of applying product
management techniques to platform engineering is figuring out usability.
Want to know how people will actually write code around this offering?
Well, writing code around the offering yourself is a good way to figure that
out.
The important thing to avoid in this model is having your platform
engineering team turn into a solutions engineering team that builds things
for partners and never creates broad-use products from these offerings. Be
thoughtful about whether the thing you are partnering on is a potential
product opportunity (in general, the shape of this is a new system that has
operational characteristics as well as code features), and not simply a
template, pattern, or bit of infrastructure automation.

-- 205 of 630 --

INCREMENTAL DELIVERY AND PROOFS OF CONCEPT
One of the ways that you discover which products make sense is by
breaking big things down into smaller experimental pieces that you can
deliver and learn from. When you are partnering with a team to prototype
something, that is an example of taking an incremental approach to
identifying a potential new platform. Instead of committing to the whole
platform up front, you build a prototype, which you can then pull out as a
proof of concept (POC). Only if that POC shows value do you expand to
other things.
Breaking platform projects down into incremental parts, whether through
POC builds for product discovery or planning a major rearchitecture so that
it delivers incremental business value throughout development (see
Chapter 8), is a key way for platform teams to sharpen their product and
business mindset.
Look for products with realistic paths to adoption
In platform teams, a lot of the product-related work is figuring out how to
make open source products or next-generation technology approaches apply
to your company. Take Kubernetes as an example. The product challenges
around internal Kubernetes come in the decisions you make about how to
integrate it into the existing ecosystem so people adopt it without too much
argument. For example, if your company is of a certain age, you may

-- 206 of 630 --

already have an old private cloud solution kicking around. Everyone is used
to running on virtual machines (VMs), but after some analysis you decide
that Kubernetes will give you some operational improvements and
encourage the company to modernize its CI/CD practices. So you start to
stand up a Kubernetes platform.
That is all well and good, but the product management work is not just
telling everyone that you have Kubernetes now and they have to use it.
Instead, the work is identifying different types of customers and figuring out
what will make it easy for them to migrate. What are the carrots you can
provide to get people to do work they don’t care about doing? Perhaps the
incentives are efficiencies in getting access to compute or storage. Perhaps
you can offer a higher SLO with the new product. Maybe it’s faster, or more
secure. But these things don’t just happen—you have to choose which
features you are highlighting to your customers, you have to help them
understand the offering and its advantages, and you have to deliver on those
promises. If you are struggling to find compelling customer benefits for this
offering to encourage adoption, your company may not have real demand
for the product.
Despite having captive audiences, platform teams are notorious for creating
half-finished product offerings that somehow fail to get adopted. When your
platform organization is running three different generations of solutions to
the same problem with no clear plan to remove any of them, and your
customers are confused by and dissatisfied with the offerings, you have a

-- 207 of 630 --

serious product failure on your hands. When evaluating a new product idea,
be realistic about the cost of driving adoption; a migration strategy must be
a primary part of the product planning (more on this in Chapter 9).
You aren’t Google, so don’t build when you don’t have to
Remember that you aren’t Google (unless you are, in which case, hi!). When
you have a platform team of 7, or even 100, you must be extremely
thoughtful about what you choose to build. Platform teams of all sizes can
get bogged down trying to imitate systems that have been built up over
years at big companies. Even when those big companies provide their
solutions as open source software, they encode assumptions about the
surrounding ecosystem of available platform products and the culture and
needs of the engineers using them. It’s not good product management to say
“Google does it, so we should.”
Instead, start with a clear understanding of the problem, and an accounting
of your existing ecosystem and culture, before diving into a technical
solution. Say you find that your data volume is out of control. You might
need to solve this with a better storage solution, or you might need to solve
it by identifying the top data producers and asking them whether the data
they’re storing is actually valuable. You’ll often find that the data is garbage,
or the developers can change their workflow, or a little bit of query
performance tuning will make the application scale just fine in a normal

-- 208 of 630 --

relational database management system (RDBMS). Build only when you
have exhausted the alternatives.
Great platform teams can tell a story about what they have built, what they
are building, and why these products make the overall engineering team
more effective. They have strong partner relationships that drive the
evolution of the platform with focused offerings that meet and anticipate the
rest of the company’s future needs. They are admired as strong engineers
who build what is needed, to high standards, and they are able to invest the
time to do that because they don’t overbuild.
Whether you are a platform engineer, engineering manager, or PM, it pays
to remember that you need to be customer-focused and strategic about your
platform offerings. Without a clear strategy for showing impact and value,
you’ll end up overlooked and understaffed, and no amount of cool new
technology will solve that problem.
Evolving Existing Offerings: Smoothing the Edges
or Rethinking the Problem
If I had asked people what they wanted, they would have said faster
horses.
—Henry Ford (maybe)

-- 209 of 630 --

In order to make good product decisions about your platform, you need to
understand the problem space you are in. If your platform charter is around
improved developer experience, you may believe that any solution that
speeds up developers is the obvious thing to invest in. This can lead to a
default of choosing projects that make existing things easier through
performance improvements, better UX, or cleaner integrations. However, in
focusing on smoothing the edges, you risk missing those opportunities
where you need to go beyond smoothing the edges to totally rethink the
problem.
The evolution from frameworks and tools to platforms is itself a rethinking
that some platform teams have not fully embraced. If your mindset is still
heavily weighted toward providing pieces of code that your customers will
adopt to make their lives easier, you can get caught in the edge-smoothing
trap. Sure, having a web framework with plug-ins that you provide for
authentication and metrics gathering is useful, and many platform teams
have such an offering. But if you can build this into a framework, could you
provide it even better in a sidecar that also does traffic shaping and
management?
Smoothing the edges is the right platform approach for certain situations. In
particular, when your platform is joining multiple activities that need to be
coordinated across teams or people (such as a developer experience
platform), some of the product focus will naturally be on smoothing the
edges and making it easy and obvious for people to see where their various

-- 210 of 630 --

code activities are in the workflow process. Exposing the status of builds,
tests, scans, code reviews, tickets, and deployment activities means that you
are potentially integrating many different systems into one smoothed
workflow. Your platform probably can’t take all of this work off the
developers’ hands completely, because it requires human inspection,
collaboration, and sign-off activities.
Still, we encourage you to start your product approach by rethinking the
problem. Instead of making something easier, ask whether the users need to
know about this thing, whatever this thing is, at all. Could your solution
completely remove their need to think about this task, not just make it easier
for them to manage the task?
Removing the users’ need to think about a task usually means you need to
think about it a lot, operate it on their behalf, and provide a rock-solid
abstraction for that offering. Many teams fail to deliver true platforms
because they do not want to own the operation and support of a heavily
used, critical offering. Packaging up some useful code in the form of a
framework or tool can make your users’ lives better, and it’s easier to do this
than to go all the way to operating a platform that handles the entire
lifecycle of a particular task—but it doesn’t deliver the full leverage of a
platform, which comes only by owning the process through operations, and
it’s hard to justify staffing a large team that supports only part of the
solution.

-- 211 of 630 --

So, how can you figure out whether you’re in the problem space of
rethinking or the problem space of smoothing the edges? Here are some
indicators:
Are you optimizing a human-in-the-loop process that involves multiple
humans collaborating? Smooth the edges.
As in our developer experience example, some things always need
humans involved. The easier you can make those humans’ lives—by
reducing their need to context switch, highlighting the work at hand,
and generally thinking a lot about their user experience—the better
your platform will be.
Are you supporting machine processes and data? Rethink the problem.
On the other hand, when the thing you are supporting is actually the
running of a system or the storage, retrieval, or analysis of data, you
want to work hard to rethink the problem at hand. Almost any time
you are writing a playbook, pattern, or common script, ask yourself
whether a better option might be for you to operate a platform that
manages these components so every team doesn’t have to run the
same playbooks themselves.
Does the human have to be in the loop? Can you remove that human’s
work? Rethink the problem.

-- 212 of 630 --

Don’t just assume a human has to be involved. Upgrades are a great
example where too many engineers assume that the right approach is
to provide better tools rather than removing the problem entirely.
How do you make upgrading underlying dependencies no longer the
problem of the user population?
To start, look at the coupling. Can you decouple the user’s software
from the platform in a way that improves the abstraction? Like in our
earlier sidecar example, you can decouple the authentication logic
from the user’s deployed process into something you can deploy.
That means you can manage the upgrades and changes of the
authentication system in your own processes, without involving the
users directly.
Are you creating an offering that brings together many different types of
related activities where each is already platform-like? Smooth the edges.
There is plenty of edge-smoothing to be done in making meta-
platforms—that is, platforms that do more than one core thing. A
platform like Heroku that can manage both the compute side of
running your processes and the database side of storing your data is a
good example of a combination platform, where a lot of the success
came from wrapping the underlying complexity in a great user
experience.
Market Research: Validating New Investments

-- 213 of 630 --

How often have you seen platform teams working on projects that seem to
be based on nothing more than the whims of the engineers? These engineers
believe they are building something of strategic importance (perhaps based
on what they’re hearing from other companies, what vendors are selling,
what they’ve experienced in a different job, or just their personal
observations), but to outsiders it seems like they’re just building something
for the fun of it. These projects occasionally pay off, but more often than
not, they fail to find the customer demand that leads to adoption.
We’ve learned that just because you’re building for internal customers
doesn’t mean you can skip the work of understanding the market, especially
when introducing brand-new products. You need to know whether the work
makes sense for this company, at this time; you need to decide which
customers you want to target (and conversely, which you want to skip); and
you need to combine your understanding of context with the target customer
base to validate the potential for making this investment, at this time.
Analyzing the target market for your investments is key to making strategic
prioritization decisions.
Product-market fit is context-dependent
Many of the new ideas that platform teams want to build come from the
wider technology zeitgeist. However, it’s common for developers and
companies to write blog posts and deliver conference talks hyping their
solutions to problems without giving the full context of the problem or the

-- 214 of 630 --

truth about internal adoption, or lack thereof. A solution that sounds good on
paper or in conference form often skips over a lot of pain that the team went
through to get it to work, and sometimes these solutions were actually
internal failures. Plenty of ideas sound cool and might even be great in
certain circumstances, but are poor general-purpose solutions.
The bigger the company, the more likely it is that their solutions rely on
undocumented internal context. For example, Google has amazing internal
developer tools and has open sourced some of them, including its build
system, Blaze, open sourced as Bazel. But what makes Google’s internal
developer experience great is more than Blaze; it’s the entire infrastructure
of tools and processes that have evolved alongside Blaze, filling in the gaps
that become apparent when you try to use Bazel without the rest of the
ecosystem.
Monorepos are a great example of a heavily context-dependent solution.
They are indispensable when you have a lot of code that needs to be
compile-time linked together, which is one reason companies like Google
invested so heavily in them (they have a lot of C++). But the overhead of
making a monorepo scale is extremely nontrivial. The near-universal
visibility and ease of changing things across all codebases is great for
modifying compile-time libraries, but it can create a level of coupling that is
detrimental for services-based development. Once you have all the context,
it may turn out that Google’s solution doesn’t make sense for your internal
platform.

-- 215 of 630 --

Also, we can’t ignore that one part of the context is the human/cultural
element of your organization. If the problem can’t be solved just by a
change in technology but rather requires a change in the company culture,
processes, or people, you may build something otherwise good that still
doesn’t gain adoption. A company that doesn’t (or can’t) share code openly
between teams won’t find much value from the visibility of a monorepo.
So, the first questions in considering the market for your solution are:
Does the solution context match your tech stack? If you have a bunch of
C++ code that is breaking due to library issues, a monorepo might be
really helpful. If, on the other hand, you’re a Java-based microservices
company, you might get more value in solving the problem of code
search across repos rather than trying to shove everything into one single
logical repository.
Will this technology solution need a corresponding culture or process
change? Is the company open to that?
Who are you targeting?
Once you’ve considered whether the proposed solution makes sense in the
current context, you need to figure out who will benefit from the work. You
expect this new offering to fill a gap or solve a problem, and now you need
to validate the demand for this offering by talking to potential customers to
see what they think. You need to make sure that this investment will benefit

-- 216 of 630 --

an important customer segment, which means first thinking about who the
customers are, and then getting feedback from them on the idea. Here are
some key questions to consider:
Which types of engineers or teams would use this offering? You may
want to build out the potential personas for your new product, to think
more clearly about who you want to target.
How many of these potential customers would want this offering? You
may think that a hosted search service would be a good platform offering,
but when you ask customers you might discover that the few who need
search already have their own bespoke systems and don’t need you to
provide a hosted option.
Are there people who will sign up to be alpha testers? When thinking
about solutions that you believe might unlock future business
opportunities, you should be able to find early adopters who will sponsor
the initiative.
While we’re focused on new products in this section, you’ll also want to
think about a market growth strategy when prioritizing new features for
existing products. Going back to Chapter 2, your strategy might be to invest
in a railway offering to make one group of customers even more productive,
or you might decide to make a paved path platform usable by a new
customer segment through improvements in security, performance, or
usability. The most important thing is to avoid turning into a feature shop by
being intentional in how you want to grow your customer base.

-- 217 of 630 --

What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?
This market analysis is about who might benefit, but also when they might
benefit. It’s one thing to spend six months building something that people
want immediately, but if most of your users won’t have any appetite for
adopting it in the foreseeable future, why are you investing in it now?
Determine how long it will take for users to experience the benefits:
What’s the onboarding cost for customers to use this offering? Is it easy
to learn how to use and integrate into their workflows?
Do they have to migrate their systems to take advantage of it? If so, do
they want this offering so much that they are willing to do the migration
work to adopt it?
If the offering is useful only for new applications, how many new
applications are planned for this year? How much time do your
customers spend on building new things versus evolving existing
applications?
All of these factors can contribute to adoption drag, which can come as a
surprise to the platform engineers who see only the potential benefits of
their offering. Make sure that what you are delivering has enough immediate
benefit that your users are willing to do the work to adopt it—this is one of
the reasons it’s worth investing in easy product onboarding.

-- 218 of 630 --

Finally, be realistic when presenting potential products and interpreting
customer feedback. Plenty of people will say yes to nice-to-have things
when they are presented as theoretical, but when those nice things are
presented as something they actually have to pay for out of their budget or
with their own time, they may be less likely to go through with the purchase.
Budgets and time are also cyclical. When other teams have to approve
funding for your initiatives from their own budgets, don’t be surprised if
they lose interest in new speculative work when times are tough. Teams that
commit to migrate to your new platform offering may discover that they’re
busy with more important work when the time comes and so delay their
migration. All of this can cause your product adoption to stumble and fail.
Your market analysis should boil down to the following tasks:
Verify your potential user base.
Quantify the potential benefit to those users.
Present the adoption cost to potential users.
Estimate how quickly users can migrate and see the benefits.
Evaluate user willingness.
Take into account the current budget climate.
If you’re looking for the next big thing, there should be obvious benefits to
having a large set of important users. When in doubt, revisit the product
offering to see if there is something that will be more compelling, easier to
use, or cheaper to build.

-- 219 of 630 --

PRODUCT MARKETING
One of the challenges that you will face, particularly at larger companies, is
drumming up awareness of your new platform products and capabilities.
Good products at big companies can struggle because the people who could
benefit from using them aren’t even aware of their existence. This can lead
customers to build their own solutions or seek solutions from vendors
instead of using the internal offering, undermining the value of your
platform team.
To counteract this, you may need to think about your marketing strategy for
your new and existing products. Good practices here include:
Creating an internal landing page that outlines your platform offerings in
an easy-to-browse manner
Using mailing lists and chat rooms to announce new features
Setting up roadshows to present your new and upcoming launches to
customer organizations
Cultivating communities of customer developers who are given early
access to new products and features and can evangelize these offerings to
their teams
The bigger the company, the harder this is, and the more you may want to
formalize this part of the work. That could include hiring formal developer
advocates and dedicating meaningful product management time to creating
and running the marketing activities.

-- 220 of 630 --

Product Metrics
If you zoom out to the biggest picture, you want to understand the cost of
using the platform, the benefits of adopting the platform, how well you are
matching your product offerings to customer demand, and how people feel
overall about what you are offering. These translate into metrics like:
How much migration overhead time do you impose? (Cost of using the
platform)
How much time or money are you saving platform users? (Benefit of
adopting the platform)
What percentage of the potential user base is voluntarily adopting this
platform? (Customer demand)
What’s the CSAT score for the platform? (Customer opinion about the
platform)
You’ll note that the “benefit” metric listed here is pretty vague. We’d love to
be able to say that our platform is generating revenue for the business and
measure its benefit that way, but it can be difficult to tie the indirect
influence of the platform to direct business outcomes. And while voluntary
adoption can tell us whether a new product is filling a pressing customer
need, it doesn’t tell us much about whether the changes to our existing, well-
adopted products are making a difference.

-- 221 of 630 --

So how do we find more specific metrics that will tell us whether we’re
driving product outcomes that are creating measurable benefits? We asked
Leif Walsh, a senior platform product manager, to explain how he
approaches impact metrics to show whether the product features achieve
their target goal. What follows is from Leif.

-- 222 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 223 of 630 --

WHY DO YOU NEED METRICS?
Whether you’re being asked to produce metrics for higher-ups or you’re
asking your team to produce them for you, the most important question to
ask is: Why? Why do you need metrics? What is the particular situation that
calls for them?
When looking for a why, you will find a few common answers. It helps to be
intentional about which cases apply in your current situation, and who the
audience is for these metrics. The metrics themselves might include:
Impact metrics
These help you explain the effectiveness of your teams and projects
upward. They can also provide targets to focus on and motivate
engineers, who like building important things.
Guardrail metrics
These allow you to avoid tunnel vision on impact metrics. In the
DORA framework, keeping change failure rate low provides a
guardrail when your goal is increasing deployment frequency, and
vice versa.
General product health metrics and traditional consumer-style metrics
(acquisition, conversion, retention, and so forth)
These help you find the largest opportunities, detect products at risk
of collapse, prioritize projects, and allocate resources.

-- 224 of 630 --

We aren’t going to spend much time on the guardrail and health metrics;
these are important to keep in mind and measure, but your most valuable
and challenging metrics will be from the first category, impact metrics.
IMPACT METRICS: GUIDING STRATEGY
Impact metrics are usually the highest-profile metrics, and a key part of
strategic decision making. A strategy requires an impact theory, which
means a hypothesis about cause-and-effect relationships. If you improve
storage throughput, the data science team will be able to run more
experiments, so you’ll make better recommendations, so your customers
will be more engaged, so you’ll be able to serve more ads, which generate
revenue. Therefore, you should work on projects that will improve storage
throughput.
Imagine constructing a causal graph, where nodes have different inputs you
might measure, like storage or experiment throughput, and outputs that are
connected to other nodes. Node outputs may be differently sensitive to
inputs: maybe the number of experiments you can run increases with
throughput at some rate, until you hit diminishing returns because of some
other factor. At the end of your graph should be some KPI that’s important
to the business, like revenue.
You should collect impact metrics at the interesting nodes in that graph. In
the previous example, you would of course measure aggregate throughput at
the storage layer, but you’d also measure the number of experiments run,
and perhaps their individual throughput and overall runtime. Other kinds of

-- 225 of 630 --

metrics show up too; for example, guardrails will appear where there are
gating factors or negative influences on your impact theory.
Metrics let you check whether your impact theory is sound and adjust when
it isn’t. Suppose you increase storage throughput, but the data scientists
aren’t running more experiments. Now you have a puzzle: Was throughput
not the bottleneck on experiment performance? Or did the data scientists
simply exhaust the number of variants they could try? You may need to
further dissect that causal link, or measure other things along that path, to
update your theory and therefore your strategy.
WHAT TO COLLECT?
The metrics that will be meaningful to your strategy are those that have
something to say about your platform’s users: their desires, their behaviors,
and the outcomes of using your platform. At the highest level, you’ll be
asking:
What are your users doing? (And, ideally, what do they think they’re
trying to do?)
How is the platform performing when they do that? Is it efficient?
Responsive? Correct?
Do you need to make any of your products faster or cheaper or easier?
Is there an unmet need for a product or integration that you should
provide?

-- 226 of 630 --

Answering these questions requires, at minimum, knowing what people are
doing, who they are, how the system behaves in response, and what the
outcome is for them.
Selecting metrics to answer those questions requires an ongoing refinement
process, which we’ll get to shortly. But a few basic guidelines cut across
nearly all situations:
Measure things your system does, from a perspective that centers your
users’ workflows and goals. Request rates are fine for operational alerts,
but if a single user gesture results in hundreds or thousands of individual
requests, measure the gesture as one event, with an overall latency.
Capture point-in-time demographic data, like team membership or
ownership. People change teams over time, and you don’t want to poison
later cohort analysis by attributing a user’s activity last year to the team
they’re on this year.
In most cases, a single denormalized table with one row per (user-centric)
event works well.
Be careful not to stop at the boundaries of your system. Make sure you’re
measuring your users’ behavior and outcomes; where they pass into
someone else’s systems, make sure those systems are capturing this data,
that you trust their data, and that you know how to connect it with yours.
In the context of an impact theory, the strongest metrics-based arguments
you’ll make are those that speak to the successes of your platform’s

-- 227 of 630 --

users, which usually means crossing through several systems to achieve
outcomes.
Surveys and user interviews help ensure you’re measuring what matters.
(Surveys will be covered later in this book.)
GETTING METRICS FROM YOUR TEAM
When you ask your team for metrics, your platform engineers will first think
of throughput, latency, and error rate—and they’re probably already
measuring them somewhere, to detect and diagnose problems. Of course,
you need these for any software system, but metrics for product strategy
decisions are generally higher-level. Who are the biggest groups of users?
Which workflow is the most time-consuming? You can’t make strategy
decisions based on throughput and latency alone.
Doing metrics well is fundamentally about asking the right questions, at the
right level of abstraction, then determining which metrics can answer those
questions.
Generally, you or your team will start by brainstorming a list of quantities
they want to know. Almost always, your next move should be to ask, “Why
is that important?” or “What question do we really want to answer with
that?” This raises the level of abstraction to questions that impact your
strategy or the business’s KPIs, and informs whether those quantities will
answer the important questions, or if you’ll need additional information to
make decisions. Some examples of initial questions and potentially more
useful higher-level counterparts include:

-- 228 of 630 --

How long is spent on compilation of code changes versus running tests
on them before they are merged? Would investment in improving
compilation speed or test performance yield higher developer velocity?
How often is each storage bucket read from? Are you storing data you
never actually read, and could you ask the teams in question to stop in
order to cut costs? Do systems exist that could benefit from caching?
Getting a team to start capturing these metrics effectively will take some
iteration. Often, a good first step is to try to aggregate operational metrics in
some way. As your practice matures, you should progress to collecting
product metrics directly—they’ll have more accuracy and fidelity.
Teams should start where they’re comfortable and collect what is easy to
collect, but this is often not what you need to know to make the best product
decisions. Follow-up questions like “Why is that the case?” will lead them
to more useful metrics. If you can have a dedicated data analyst work with
them, they’ll often be able to ask good questions to get more useful metrics.
Sometimes you will have to be that person.
MISUSE OF METRICS
When you ask for metrics, some people will not want to provide them, out
of fear that they’ll be misinterpreted or abused to support the wrong
conclusions. This fear is often well intentioned (and well placed), but you
still need to collect the data. Some misuse will likely happen, but the useful
insights and decisions the metrics contribute to will outweigh that.

-- 229 of 630 --

To overcome this obstacle, it can help to frame the initial metrics collection
as a prototype that you’ll refine over time—after all, it’s very hard to collect
the right metrics without first collecting the wrong metrics, understanding
why, and adjusting. Good documentation also helps prevent accidental
misinterpretation. You should encourage your teams to document their
schemas and data generation processes, and keep that documentation up to
date.
DON’T WAIT FOR PERFECTION
There’s more to metrics than this; you’ll need to store the metrics you
collect (use something easy to query with SQL) and document them for
future interpretation (especially if someone wants to use them in support of
their next promotion!). But the most important thing to do is to start asking
questions about what the impact of the product changes looks like, and what
you can measure to know that you’re going in the right direction. Don’t let
the perfect be the enemy of the good; even basic metrics can make a big
difference in driving good product outcomes!
Successful Product Execution: Creating a
Product Roadmap
A strong customer-focused product culture and a good understanding of
product discovery is helpful, but you must still manage to execute against all

-- 230 of 630 --

of this. It’s time to tie these ideas into a roadmap. But that’s easier said than
done; when you first start trying to make this product shift, it’s common to
find yourself in a situation that looks like this:
You have a compute platform team. There are some people working on
the base operating system, container, and VM images, some people
working on configuration management, some people working on the
legacy virtual machine openstack environment, some people working
on compute orchestration (Kubernetes), and some working on
Terraform for cloud stuff. Phew. Each of these areas is going OK, and
they often work together well enough in pairwise groups. But there is
no overarching concept of how these pieces join together to create a
complete and well-integrated landscape for developers, and so each
team builds mostly within their silo, and the overall experience
remains disjointed and confusing.
When you find yourself in this situation, the team needs to take a step back
and think about the big picture. Where do you want to go with all of this?
What’s the long-term vision? How should these product offerings fit
together? What should a developer using this platform need to care about,
and what should the platform just do for them? Once you have this insight,
you can start to create a product roadmap that reflects not only a vision, but
a strategy for tying all these pieces together to get there.

-- 231 of 630 --

In the product roadmapping process, we go from vision to reality. Your
customers’ needs (both immediate and longer term), in combination with
engineering feasibility and cost analysis, will help you figure out which
pieces you should tackle and in what approximate order. This gives you a
rough plan, which you can break down into important delivery milestones
and places to potentially pause and reevaluate the next steps. This is
supported by impact metrics that show you whether your work is delivering
what you expected it to.
The rest of this section illustrates this process.
Vision: Long Term
The vision attempts to paint a picture of the essential characteristics of a
better future platform. This vision may never be fully realized, but it is an
aspirational starting point, and it serves to align the work in the plan. In your
compute platform, your vision might be to enable a developer to provision
the environment that they need in two hours, whether it’s on premises, in the
cloud, or even in your DMZ.
Strategy: Middle Term
To formulate a strategy, you need to understand what is preventing you from
achieving your vision. Fortunately, the minute you present this to your
engineering team they will immediately identify some technical challenges
2
3

-- 232 of 630 --

that need to be addressed. While engineering works through the options for
tackling those challenges, product management can start to identify what
will need to happen from the users’ perspective. This includes
understanding their current pain points, how they want to interact with the
platform (UI? API? command line?), and when they interact (how often are
they provisioning, anyway?). Product management will also make sure they
know who the real users of this system will be—you may think it’s a
specialized group of people when it’s actually every developer, or vice
versa. Ultimately, this should lead to the high-level product requirements.
Coming back to the two-hour provisioning vision, after doing all this
research you may decide that one part of the strategy is “Fast containerized
compute provisioning: reduce the application provisioning time for new
containerized environments to minutes.” This will incentivize application
developers who want to move fast to containerize their applications and give
you a more achievable intermediate target, rather than trying to chip away at
the provisioning time for all types of applications in all environments. That’s
the point of not jumping straight from a vision to a plan; documenting a
strategy makes such decisions clear.
Goals and Metrics: This Year
Now that you have both the high-level product requirements and a technical
sense of the major roadblocks, you can start to put together the goals for the
next year. This may be written in an objectives and key results (OKR)–like

-- 233 of 630 --

format, where the objective is an opinionated goal statement and the key
results detail specific areas of focus for the year and the metrics that you are
monitoring to know that you are executing successfully on these areas. For
your compute team, one OKR might look like this:
Objective:
Bring fast compute provisioning for containerized environments to
the user’s development context
Key Results:
Enable provisioning from the IDE or command line for 50% of
our supported compute types (supports: provisioning within the
user’s development context)
Reduce the time from provisioning request to completion with
available compute by 25% (supports: fast compute provisioning)
Drive down usage of legacy VM platform by 20% (supports:
moving to modern environments)
Milestones: Quarterly
Your roadmap milestones will fill in the year. What are the rough pieces of
technical work that will need to be delivered to achieve these goals? When
do you think features will be delivered to your customers? Do you need to

-- 234 of 630 --

break down big features into smaller, incremental deliverables? You may
know some of this now, and you may have placeholders for others
depending on what happens in the first or second quarter. Write it all down
and start tracking quarterly. In Chapter 7, we will discuss how to merge
these pieces of incremental feature delivery with other important platform
work to produce an overall prioritized roadmap that platform engineering
management can use to track execution.
The Customer-Facing Roadmap
To get to reasonable estimates for product delivery, you need to plan and
track the technical work that enables these features. But when it comes to
sharing your plans with the customers, we recommend limiting the timeline
to only user-visible feature delivery. If users ask why a particular feature
will take so long, you can share the underlying technical roadmap, but
exposing too many of the internal technical milestones can leave you open
to accusations of building “things that engineering thinks are cool” instead
of focusing on business delivery.
Specification of Features
Let’s assume that you’ve done the work of creating a compelling vision,
you’ve created some good metrics to guide your execution of this vision,
and product and engineering have partnered throughout to figure out the
work that needs to be done to, you all hope, deliver on these metrics in a

-- 235 of 630 --

technically feasible way. Your broad roadmap is complete, and you’re ready
to get into the day-to-day work of delivering it through a set of features.
When it comes to specifying features, the product manager needs to
document the feature outcomes: why is this important to the customers,
what do they need from this feature, and how does it fit into the overall
vision of where you want the product to go? They then share these feature
outcomes with the engineering leads for the areas in question. This should
turn into a discussion between engineering and product about what should
be done to achieve the why behind a specific need. Deciding what to build
cannot be done by the product manager alone, because there are technical,
budgetary, and human constraints that are understood best by engineering
leadership. Together, they will turn the why into what, breaking down any
what that will take longer than a month or so to implement into a few
substeps. Take all of this and write it up as a product requirements
document, user stories, or whatever format your organization uses to record
feature requirements, and you now have the next level of detail that shows
work that you’ll track during the quarter.
Practice Makes Perfect
These practices are somewhat simple, but they are not easy. Developing a
compelling vision is hard. Breaking it down into measurable items that
reflect impact and not just output is hard. Documenting feature outcomes
and working with engineering to figure out what to build to achieve these

-- 236 of 630 --

outcomes is hard. But keep doing this exercise, and over time you will get
the rhythms, you’ll start to get a sense of what “good” feels like, and with
luck you’ll get to experience the satisfaction of dreaming big and,
eventually, making it happen.

-- 237 of 630 --

WHY CAN’T I ASK MY CUSTOMERS TO TELL ME WHAT THEY WANT?
Customer empathy is about more than appreciating that your customers have
an opinion and that you are building to help them. It also means
understanding their limitations and what you can realistically ask of them.
Take the following example:
I’ve been tasked to build a new central platform for my company. We
have some product managers, but far more customer teams than our
product managers can really cover, so we’ve set up some customer
working groups to get input on the platform and what we should build,
to see if what we’re building will work for the customers.
This seemed to be a fine approach, but one of our biggest customer
groups continually fails to show up to these meetings, and when they
do the representative claims that they can’t really represent their
whole division. It’s becoming really frustrating because we can’t
figure out what they actually need or whether we’re building the right
thing, and it’s slowing down my team. What should we do?

-- 238 of 630 --

Let’s start with the basics: you cannot just expect your customers to show up
in working groups and tell you exactly what the product needs to look like.
This doesn’t work because your customers are busy, because your customers
are not themselves product managers who can write up detailed
requirements documents for you, and because your customers might be able
to describe problems they are experiencing at the moment, but they are very
unlikely to do a good job of reasoning abstractly about how they might use
some future system. Most people are not good at thinking at that level of
abstraction, particularly about some brand-new technology they have never
worked with before.
Going one level deeper, even if your customers are showing up to these
meetings and giving feedback, you can’t have just this one way to ensure
you are building a usable product. The work of building a usable product
does not end until people are happily using the product. If you don’t have
customer touchpoints throughout the cycle of building and deploying
product features, and measures for whether those features are useful that go
beyond what some customer group said in the design phase, you do not have
a fully realized product plan. Again, you almost certainly do not have the
product management bandwidth to run a new platform buildout of the
implied complexity that you are discussing. You may need to hire more
PMs, and you certainly should put in more work to figure out what your
customers actually want and need, instead of putting the onus on them to tell
you whether or not your ideas will do what they want.

-- 239 of 630 --

How can you get yourself out of this mess? Start with the boring parts of the
new platform—the parts you don’t think require nuanced differences to meet
the needs of diverse customers; the parts you feel extremely confident that
you understand; the parts you have seen built successfully before, or that
maybe a customer team has already built for themselves, or that are just
obvious no-brainer components—and get to work building those. While you
work on those, build up your product management team enough to do
market research, to identify potential use cases in as many of the customer
teams as possible, to sign up alpha and beta customers, and to figure out
metrics for adoption that show the new features are actually delivering
value.
Then turn to the next most obvious features, and start thinking about them.
Don’t think about the most complex stuff. You’re not ready for that yet. Are
you worried you’re going to design something that will never be able to
handle the complex stuff? Well, you’re just as likely to design something
meant to handle the complex stuff that fails to handle everything as you are
to design something meant to handle the simple stuff that needs to be
reworked for the complex. So, you might as well get started on some simple
stuff that works.
Unfortunately, we can’t just ask our customers what to build, but we can use
them to validate our ideas by getting their feedback quickly on what we
build, and making sure there is demand throughout our incremental delivery.

-- 240 of 630 --

Product Failure Modes
When you first start to adopt product management in your internal platform
teams, it’s easy to make mistakes that can lead to a failed product
transformation. Here are some of the gotchas to watch out for when
applying these ideas.
Underestimating the Migration Cost
We talk a lot about migrations in this book because migrations are such a
critical part of platform engineering, but we want to reemphasize the
importance of thinking about their cost even here, in the product chapter.
Product managers need to consider the cost of migrations when they make
product decisions, because this cost can dwarf the value of the new offering
if they aren’t careful.
One of the clearest examples of this that Camille has seen was in a
developer experience team, where the product manager was convinced that a
new code search tool would add a bunch of value to the company. He did a
good job creating a pitch for why this product was valuable, selling the idea
to the engineering team, to some of the customers, and eventually,
reluctantly, to Camille. This product was going to replace the existing open
source code search offering, but she was assured that this would be a
reasonably straightforward task.

-- 241 of 630 --

Fast-forward a couple of years, and the straightforward migration was
finally, after much stress and work, done. As you can probably guess, this
was not a simple migration. Links to the old search tool were everywhere,
and the engineering team had realized after lengthy deliberation that they
would need to write a redirector service to send links from the old tool to the
appropriate location in the new one. In addition, the old tool had been set up
to ignore certain meta-repositories, branches, and other pieces of code that
weren’t that important, and there were a bunch of annoying edge cases that
engineering had to work around to make the offering acceptable. Setting up
the new system for that was harder than anyone expected.
But even worse, no one had thought through the user training element of the
migration. Because no one had done a detailed analysis of how the users
accessed the old tool, there were patterns that were not quite one-for-one,
and some training was required for users to onboard. Changing something
that is so deeply ingrained and foundational in the developer workflow is
tricky, and it led to a lot of complaints from the users when they got an
experience that didn’t make sense compared to what they were used to.
Product managers must remember that migration costs—both in terms of
engineering and the user experience—can be major factors in a product’s
success or failure. Sometimes, despite a painful migration, the end result is
worth it—but going in without having done the analysis often results in
users viewing your work as sloppy and ill-considered.

-- 242 of 630 --

Overestimating the Change Budget for Users
It would be nice if your users could adopt new offerings the minute those
offerings were ready. Unfortunately, most users have a long list of things on
their plate, and adopting a new tool, workflow, or system has to fit into the
wider picture of all this work. Product managers in platform teams want to
make new stuff and are evaluated based on the organization’s adoption of
their offerings, so they clamor for attention to their shiny new product
offerings. But most customers can take on only so much change at once, and
if your change is anything less than a must-have, you are likely to
experience slow adoption. This is particularly true in times of high pressure,
when budgets are tight, deadlines are looming, or other fires are burning in
the organization. That’s why we use the term change budget—because it
needs to be budgeted in with all of the other work that is happening in the
team.
In our opinion, leadership needs to be realistic about how much platform
and infrastructure change can be pushed into an organization in any given
period. Few companies can successfully coordinate all change at this level
(Camille has tried and failed). Each team is incentivized to clamor for the
attention of the same people, to get their migrations prioritized, and to get
their products to be the ones that users are focused on. So, you’re probably
competing in a noisy world, and the bigger the company, the noisier the
solution and change space.

-- 243 of 630 --

At least within your own product area, think about how much change you
are really going to push through the company in a given year. Is there a way
to make that change easier to adopt so your users can take on more of it
without increased effort? As we saw in our source code search example, for
users to use the new offering they need to be able to use it to do the same
things they were doing before; but to really make that effort pay off, they
need to be able to do more than they were doing before. Is it easy for them
to see immediate benefits once they’ve gotten used to the new tool? Will it
create time savings for the users that they can reinvest into getting more
done, and actually drive productivity? Think about all of these factors when
you make your product roadmap, because a customer base can absorb only
so much change at once.
Overestimating the Value of New Features When
Stability Is Poor
This one is painful but true: both engineers and product managers mistake
novelty as the most important offering their platforms can provide, and they
forget that stability is often at least as important, if not more so. Stability is a
factor in both migration efforts and change budgets. When you are using
highly stable systems, you have more cycles to spend on migration and
other types of change, because you aren’t constantly spending time
contending with platform failures that distract both the engineering team and
the users. Stability is part of the product currency you have to spend, and

-- 244 of 630 --

when you lack stability, your customers lose their trust in your platform.
Who wants to adopt something new from a team that doesn’t seem to know
how to operate the existing system?
When your platform is having stability issues, it’s almost always better to
invest engineering time into improving stability instead of adding more
features or products onto an unreliable base. This might mean that you miss
some of your product goals for the year, but who cares about new stuff when
you can’t even reliably use the existing offerings?
Having Too Many Product Managers for the Size
of the Engineering Team
This one might come as a surprise, because most of us have too few product
managers. But there is such a thing as too many PMs, and the ratio of PMs
to engineers may be different for your platform team than it is for your
application engineering teams. When you wind up with too many PMs, they
can end up doing tasks that the engineers should be doing themselves, like
managing the actual execution of the work. Be wary of letting engineers
shut off their brains when it comes to their jobs, including deciding what to
work on, when, and how to prioritize work. When you have too many
product managers and treat your engineering teams like external contractors
who just take in specs and implement them, you create all sorts of
unintended downsides, cut off the creativity and ownership of a big part of
the team, and generally end up with poor results.

-- 245 of 630 --

You may want us to give you a ratio here, but our experience is that this is
quite variable due to the maturity of the products and the company and the
nature of the other people on the team. Our best rule of thumb is that you
should feel stretched for product managers but not be starving for them; a
decent estimate is usually somewhere between the number of second-line
and first-line engineering managers, with Ian preferring the former and
Camille closer to the latter.
Having Product Managers Doing the Work That
Engineering Managers Should Be Doing
A related point to the previous one is that when you have product managers
doing all the project management for a team, grooming Jira backlogs and
spoon-feeding the team work, you end up with bad outcomes. Most
commonly, engineers hide behind this micromanagement to justify technical
debt in their systems by saying that the product manager did not prioritize
that work, so they didn’t have the ability to address it. Do not give
engineering teams this out. Engineering management must at a minimum
co-own the actual work plan for the teams (as you’ll see in Chapter 7, we
call this the “bottom-up” roadmap). This is a universal truth, but it’s one that
bugs us whether it’s in the context of application engineering or platform
engineering.
Similarly, product management is not “product ownership” in the Agile
sense. Product managers are not glorified scrum masters just because they
4

-- 246 of 630 --

are managing internal products. You may have people in the “product
owner” role of an Agile organization who are doing well as product
managers, but in our experience these roles tend to overfocus on the project
management elements of the job (backlog grooming, short-term
prioritization, status reporting) and neglect the more ambiguous product
management tasks. It is hard to be deep in the day-to-day execution details
of a product and thinking ahead to shape the strategy at the same time.
While good product managers will step in to support project execution as
needed, trying to merge project and product management into one “product
owner” role is likely to result in a weak and reactive product approach.
Wrapping Up
When we consider the ways in which platform teams fail at product
development, we see three broad categories:
Culture
The team fails to adopt a product culture and continues to expect
users to directly tell them what to build, while internally focusing too
much on the technology and operations and not enough on the
customers.
Product-market fit

-- 247 of 630 --

The team fails to evaluate new product ideas against internal market
needs and so builds things that customers don’t want. They also don’t
establish impact metrics for these product bets to clarify the
opportunity.
Execution
The team doesn’t bother to align its work with a larger product
strategy and fails to consider the overhead costs to the customers
(migrations, change budget) in product planning. They may also
misuse product managers to do engineering management work.
While the paths to failure are clear, the path to success is nuanced. Good
product culture is built on relationships, conversations, rewards, focus, and a
day-in, day-out willingness to stretch and question whether you’re meeting
your customers where they are, rather than where you want them to be.
Finding market fit can require many iterations of trial and error before you
get to the root of what teams really need. And execution is as much the
constant work of building and refining practices such as roadmapping as it is
the work of negotiating and developing the right product management team
for the organization today.
Distilling everything useful to say about product management into a single
chapter would be impossible, so this chapter has given a whirlwind tour of a
number of complex topics. We realize that some of you might be
disappointed that we haven’t presented a surefire way to build great

-- 248 of 630 --

platform products, but great products are always situational, stemming from
deep insight into what people need, combined with an understanding of
what is realistic to build. This is why it is so important to spend time
understanding your customers, and why so many of your best products will
be initiated by other teams building for themselves. Platform engineering
doesn’t have to be the source of product innovation in your company; you
merely need to make sure you don’t completely drop the ball of customer
focus and product discipline in favor of technical and operational concerns.
We know this is a journey, but we hope this chapter has given you some
ideas for the next steps on the road ahead.
In this case, “stakeholders” refers to the management of the customer teams, often business leaders.
A DMZ, or demilitarized zone, is a subnetwork where compute/network resources facing the public
internet can be isolated from the internal network.
For more on strategy, we recommend Richard P. Rumelt’s book Good Strategy/Bad Strategy (Profile
Books).
The most important aspect is how many engineers are working on actively evolving product
offerings and features versus other types of engineering work; PMs are in lower demand when most
of the work is related to operational efficiency or scaling, for example.
1
2
3
4

-- 249 of 630 --

Chapter 6. Operating Platforms
Rare things become common at scale.
—Jason Cohen
No matter how well you build a platform, the systems it depends on are
complex, so it will inevitably have operational issues. As useful as the
product mindset is for platforms, product-focused teams can underinvest in
operations when times are good—they move fast and deliver lots of great
features, but pile up operational debt along the way. A successful application
team might be able to get away with this, because their contributions to the
business’s top line are rewarded with extra headcount, which makes it
possible to stay ahead of the debt. But that’s not the situation most platform
teams are in.
Platforms create their value through leverage, and one aspect of leverage is
efficiency—supporting substantially more scale without needing to hire
more people into the platform team. However, as this chapter’s introductory
quote suggests, this is in conflict with the fact that systems often run into
new problems just because of scale, particularly operationally. This means
constant-sized teams supporting scaling platforms can wind up in
“operational hell,” where neglected operational problems start having
ongoing acute business impact, eroding customer trust. As the system is
handling critical load at scale, it can take months to remediate the acute
1

-- 250 of 630 --

impact and years to address the core issues, and all the while new product
features are stalled.
To avoid this, platform teams need to routinely invest in operational
practices, even when times are good. In this chapter, we cover three
operational practices your platform team should own and embrace:
On-call
This is the fundamental practice of scheduling engineers to be
available to respond to issues the system may have in production.
User support
As we called out in Chapter 2, this is usually a large enough problem
for platforms that it requires separate practices than just being
handled by the on-call engineer.
Operational feedback
These are the practices you need to invest in to ensure you are
proactively addressing operational problems well enough to stop
them from becoming acute.
Let’s dig into on-call practices first.

-- 251 of 630 --

ESSENTIAL PRACTICES, NOT PROCESSES
In this chapter, we talk about what platforms need as a list of essential
practices rather than an exhaustive list of processes. There is no shortage of
writing on operational processes in the SRE and DevOps literature, and all
of it could be applied to platforms—but there are far too many potential
processes to adopt, requiring far too much work to do them all correctly. Too
many leaders force processes that they’ve just read about (or worse, that
they used in their last job) onto their organization, without looking at the
costs and benefits for the particular set of problems the team is dealing with.
Processes are situational, and the granular details should be tailored to the
unique challenges your team is facing. But practices are broad. They
provide a framework and allow you to create whatever process you need to
solve the specific problem you have today. As your problems change, your
processes will change too. But the practice remains.
On-Call Practices
When the inevitable operational issues happen, you need the most skilled
and knowledgeable people available to remediate them as quickly as
possible. This is where your on-call practices come in. We strongly
recommend having a merged DevOps on-call team that goes on rotation
24x7 to handle non-support operational issues. We realize this is not always

-- 252 of 630 --

a popular opinion, but hear us out. As we will explain, with the right
management practices to ensure sustainability, we’ve seen platform teams
come to prefer this approach because it gives them more control over their
fate.
Why 24x7 On-Call Coverage Matters
A lot of platforms support 24x7 businesses, so the need for 24x7 on-call
coverage is not in question. But there are other types of “noncritical”
platforms, particularly around developer tools or other purely internal use
cases, where we have seen teams tie themselves in knots trying to avoid
24x7 on-call coverage, even as it ends up making some customers furious.
The problem is that these platforms can be critical at surprising times. For
example, many companies have applications that can only be deployed
during off-hours (i.e., nights and weekends), and the teams that own the
deployment tools need to ensure those tools are operational during these
periods. Imagine that a bug is discovered late at night and the deployment
platform is malfunctioning. Should the application team just wait until the
morning for the developer tools team to come in and support them, and
leave the bug outstanding? Of course not!
There are rare exceptions to the 24x7 rule, we will admit, but your team
likely is not one of the exceptions. When you ignore this best practice to
protect your engineers from working outside business hours, you undermine

-- 253 of 630 --

your ability to operate the platform in the face of unforeseen circumstances
and risk losing the trust of the customers who are impacted by them.
Why Merged DevOps?
As we discussed in Chapter 1, the industry is divided over whether
operational work (like being on-call) should be done by the development
team or split out and handled by a separate team, called variously SRE,
DevOps, or operations. We acknowledge that the best option isn’t obvious
for large teams that build planet-scale, business-critical applications. But
that’s precisely because these teams are large—meaning, they have enough
people to maintain a deep focus on both development and operations.
Most platform engineering teams do not have this luxury. Because platforms
abstract over various vendor and OSS systems, the products these teams are
responsible for are usually much more operationally complex than the
products equivalently sized application development teams deal with.
Indeed, this is the “leverage” of platform engineering that makes it more
efficient than application teams operating the OSS and vendor systems
directly. However, it also creates a problem: who are the people who can be
on-call to quickly diagnose and remediate a problem that could be caused by
in-house code, by one of the OSS or vendor systems, or by some interaction
between them? Our answer is that only a merged team can staff an on-call
rotation with the required level of expertise in a sustainable manner.

-- 254 of 630 --

Platform software engineers may push back on this. After all, they didn’t
develop those external systems—their expertise is in leveraging the systems
to develop features, not debugging them in production! They may ask you to
hire some SREs to be on-call, since they can specialize in deep knowledge
of the full system’s complexity, and build automation besides. This would
be wonderful, but the reality is that most platform teams can’t afford to fully
staff and skill up a team of SRE specialists. The SRE literature suggests the
same thing that our experience shows, which is that few engineers will stay
in a job where they are on-call over 25% of the time. So if you go the split
approach, then in addition to your platform development team, you need the
on-call rotation to be covered by a team of at least four or five SREs.
Because most platform teams can’t afford this much dedicated headcount, to
make the split SRE or DevOps approach work, companies sometimes fudge
things by assigning that team a bunch of different platforms to be on-call
for. However, this prevents them from having deep experience with and
knowledge of each of those platforms. So, when a critical but complex
operational issue arises, you no longer have someone with deep expertise
remediating it, and you’ve just re-created the Ops versus Dev finger-
pointing divide we described in Chapter 1.
Avoiding this means you need your software developers to be on the same
team as your DevOps/SRE systems generalists, and on the same on-call
rotation. That may mean you have to exclude from the team some great
software engineers who don’t have the skills, mindset, or desire to be on-
2

-- 255 of 630 --

call. But our experience is that, unless you are building FAANG-scale
platforms that can justify having 10 or more engineers working on them
full-time, it’s not worth the difficulties of trying to make a split system
work.
Getting to a Sustainable On-Call Load
For a platform engineering team to be able to staff a 24x7 on-call rotation
itself, the load has to be sustainable. By that, we mean that it should support
each individual’s ability to meet their job’s expectations by allowing them to
mostly work within typical professional nine-to-five working hours. How do
we square this seeming contradiction?
The first step is to ensure that no one is on-call more than one week out of
four, and ideally not more than one out of every six to eight weeks. The next
step is looking at pager load—the type of operational event needing a
human response before the next business day, and usually within 15
minutes. In our experience, a sustainable 24x7 on-call load should involve
fielding fewer than five business-impacting pages a week.
Unfortunately, many of you will compare that number to where you are
today and laugh in despair. Or worse, you know that if you cite a goal like
five pages a week to your stakeholders (i.e., the leadership of your internal
customers), they will think your platform team is out of touch with the
business, since they deal with so many more than that. But we firmly

-- 256 of 630 --

believe that a constant demand of more than five pages a week is not
sustainable. It may be supportable in the short term, while the platform is in
an “exciting growth” stage and team members are willing to go above and
beyond despite the impact on their work-life balance, but that lack of work-
life balance will gradually lead to burnout and start having an impact on
staff retention.
As an example, when Ian worked at Amazon in 2014, his larger organization
was experiencing what we call operational hell—a high operational load
after years of rapid growth. The early builders who had tolerated the
operational load during the exciting phase had moved on, leaving their
systems for a second generation. There were monthly operational issues
that, while they didn’t have a widespread impact, upset some important
customers. Annual attrition was running at about 25%, and not only was this
a first-order problem in terms of human impact, but it was also leading to a
knowledge loss that itself caused more operational issues.
Ian’s organization got a new VP who wanted to improve the engineers’ on-
call experience, in the hopes of reducing attrition and getting to an
operationally sustainable trajectory. He started by looking at Amazon-wide
developer survey data on team engagement, wanting to correlate the
response data with support load. The strongest signal he found was for pager
events. He found that:
Fewer than two pages a week correlated with happy team members.

-- 257 of 630 --

Two to five pages a week correlated with some unhappiness with
operational load, but did not correlate with a negative response to the
question “Do you see yourself on this team in 12 months?”
More than five pages a week correlated with consistent unhappiness, and
also correlated with a negative response to the question “Do you see
yourself on this team in 12 months?”
It’s compelling evidence, but it’s not surprising. We all know our teams
would be thrilled if the on-call experience was less terrible. But how do you
get there? You start by keeping your focus on the highest priority: platform
stability.
NOTE
This is a good place to reemphasize a practice versus process approach. The practice is sustainable
on-call, but the process to achieve that can change. The goal of five pages per week is important, but
if it’s clear the team is doing well, you may only need a process to track the average number of pages
a week, for example, as part of each quarter’s OKRs. Alternatively, if the team is struggling with
operational hell, you will need a more rigorous process with weekly metrics reporting and actionable
remediation steps. Processes are flexible; implementing some type of practice is not.
Prioritize stability
If your platform is having more than five business-impacting events a week,
then it’s not providing a stable foundation for the business. We don’t mean
this to feel like finger-pointing. It’s a pretty common situation to be in. For
instance, you may intentionally underarchitect your platform as you partner

-- 258 of 630 --

with customers to build the right initial feature set, then become a victim of
success with broader demand driving too-rapid growth. Having more than
five business-impacting events per week is a signal that you’ve reached
critical adoption levels; now it’s on you to raise the white flag, put aside
feature work, and restore stability.
If you’re communicating stability as your team’s main value and purpose,
then your stakeholders will understand why it’s in their best interest for you
to do this—you might even find that they’re willing to help. However, as
part of that argument, they may want to see data about why your on-call
metrics are a valid proxy for real impact. And that is often a problem
because of false alarms.
Eliminate false alarms
False alarms are a big obstacle to understanding the sustainability of your
on-call load. The presence of false alarms means that five high-severity
pages a week rarely means five business-impacting events a week. When
you have the noise of false alarms to deal with, each team has to provide
context to explain what their on-call load really is. A team getting 10 pages
a week may be quite healthy if they’re mostly false alarms that come in
during their own deployments that happen during business hours. Another
team getting five pages a week could be in far worse shape if they happen at
2 a.m. each weekday because some application’s daily batch job is causing
the system to fail.

-- 259 of 630 --

To complicate matters, some engineers are resistant to eliminating false
alarms precisely because they correlate with workday events such as
deployments, so they become a “pulse” to remind them of what’s
happening. Such engineers tend to care little about the managerial value of
consistent measurement to communicate and drive decisions. However,
most teams also have engineers who feel drained by false alarms—it’s noise,
distracting them from what is most important. Often the best way to resolve
such a situation is to first invest in other feedback mechanisms for those
who like to feel a “pulse” (e.g., dashboards). You can then work to eliminate
the false alarms, improving the quality of your metrics and the experience of
the other engineers on the team.
Use another platform team for secondary rotation
We find this advice from the SRE book to be our best practice as well: “In
teams for which a secondary rotation is not strictly required for duty
distribution, it is common for two related teams to serve as secondary on-
call for each other, with fall-through handling duties. This setup eliminates
the need for an exclusive secondary on-call rotation.”
In the context of platform engineering, the secondary rotation will be with
another platform team that has no direct responsibility for and little
expertise on the platform for which they were just paged. All this other team
can really do is follow a runbook, or call people further up the chain to get
the primary team to engage if the runbook fails. Not only is this frustrating

-- 260 of 630 --

work, it also presents a business cost in terms of increased mitigation time.
Thus, it should be extraordinarily rare for incidents to fall through to the
secondary team. This is another reason why the goal of five business-
impacting pages a week is so important: it makes pages of the secondary
team rare.
Paying for on-call coverage won’t make an unsustainable load
better
According to the Gergely Orosz’s Pragmatic Engineer blog, few US
companies pay US employees for their off-hours time on-call, because there
is no legal requirement to do so. Most EU companies do—a few pay the
legal minimum, but most pay around 500 euros a week, which is more than
the legal minimum but still a fraction of their engineers’ in-hours rate. This
means even when being on-call is compensated, there is a fairness issue to
contend with.
If you aren’t on top of ensuring the load is sustainable across all teams, the
amount of off-hours work and stress will vary significantly by team, so it’s
not fair to pay everyone the same amount. Some teams will get a nice bonus
and no extra work, while others will receive a pittance relative to the amount
of off-hours work they put in and stress they are put under. You could try
adjusting the compensation for fairness by factoring in parameters like
number of pages or total off-hours time engaged, but in practice, we haven’t
seen this work—it subsidizes management that neglects making the on-call

-- 261 of 630 --

load more sustainable and encourages gamesmanship around the metrics,
which results in more unfairness (and bad team politics to boot).
So, the best approach is to focus your efforts on removing all the false
alarms and getting the on-call load down to at most five business-impacting
issues a week. At that count, off-hour pages should be manageable, and
what is seen as fair compensation in your country (if any) should be pretty
close to fair. Save the special policies for special circumstances where teams
have significant on-call responsibilities during off-hours (e.g., a team in
Eastern Europe supporting application teams in the US).
Support Practices
For many application engineering teams, user support accounts for a small
percentage of their load compared to other operational issues, which means
it can be comfortably handled by the on-call engineer. This is not always
true for platform teams. Their users are all internal, and between their
number and the breadth of use cases, the load to support them can be too
much for whoever’s on-call to handle. This is particularly a problem when
the business wants support to be staffed 24x7 and paged to help even when
it’s not clear the platform is the root cause. Trying to combine support with
on-call coverage will usually push you well over a sustainable on-call load.
In this section, we’ll discuss the different steps that you can take to handle
the support load on your team at increasing levels of load. But first, let’s talk

-- 262 of 630 --

about why it’s essential that your engineers do some user support.
Why Platform Engineers Should Do Support
Work
We understand why your instinct, as with being on call, might be to protect
your platform engineers from support duties. Support is a per-user
engagement and seems low-leverage compared to the code they could be
developing to make the platform better for all users. However, it’s crucial
for engineers to directly experience users’ problems to understand their
needs and build the right features for the platform.
Good platforms add value by abstracting underlying complexity. But even
the best platforms can’t shield users entirely, because some of that
complexity inevitably leaks through. When platform engineers are removed
from hearing from users about their problems, they forget that “user
problems” are really platform problems, and so build platforms with
unrealistic expectations of users. Namely:
They expect users to understand what is unavoidably complex about the
platform.
They expect users to know what is reasonable to expect and not expect
from the system (or to read copious documentation).
They expect users to have empathy for them and understand why it is
impossible for the platform team to do a better job than it’s already

-- 263 of 630 --

doing.
As an example of what this looks like, we have seen teams sending notices
to users, chiding them for “misusing the platform” and calling out “badly
behaving applications,” as though the platform’s failure to protect against
edge cases is the user’s fault.
A platform team nurturing the belief that users are thinking as much about
the platform as they do is a platform team that is not engaging with their
user’s problems in a way that leads to building a better platform—but if
your engineers live in a silo protected from your users’ problems, this is an
easy pattern of belief to fall into. Involve all your engineers in user support.
They, and your platform, will be better for it.
Stage 1: Formalize Support Levels
You may have nodded in agreement with everything in the last section. But
you also face 30 support tickets a week, with half of those marked “business
critical, must respond in 1 hour.” So, what are you to do?
The first thing to note is that 30 support tickets a week may or may not be a
sustainable level of demand. You need to understand what those 30 support
tickets really represent, which requires first categorizing them and then
taking a deep dive into the problem categories. Diego Quiroga, a senior

-- 264 of 630 --

platform engineering leader, gives the following example of what those
categories might look like:
1. Requests for help troubleshooting production issues
2. Noncritical bugs in the platform’s implementation, with some being
addressable through redirection to diagnostic tools and others requiring
in-depth diagnosis
3. Requests for help using the platform, with some quickly resolved by
directing users to documentation and others requiring more thorough
engagement
4. Platform feature requests submitted as bugs
5. Pull request reviews for augmenting platform services or components
6. Broader or more complex questions better suited for a technical design
review during office hours
Once the weekly count in any given category is more than a few, you need
to investigate. There could be a lot of repetition in these requests, which you
can seek to eliminate through documentation, user training, or by improving
the platform itself. It can be tempting to skip this, particularly for leaders
with a development background who wish it was someone else’s job—but
until you are able to explain what is driving your support load, and why it is
beyond your ability to get on top of it, you should expect no help from
customers in trying to reduce its impact on your team.

-- 265 of 630 --

Next, define your support levels, often called your support service level
agreement (SLA). This means defining categories of response engagement
and specifying under what conditions they can be used. The fundamental
questions you are trying to answer for a customer who feels (i.e., may or
may not be) blocked or is seeing a production issue are:
Can I immediately engage a platform engineer to help?
If not, how long will I have to wait for some help?
The first question requires defining what you consider to be a critical issue.
If your condition for a critical issue is “any issue that the customer believes
your engagement would help remediate,” you are going to struggle to hit the
sustainable on-call goal of five pages a week. At a large scale of platform
adoption, even an added condition of “and that has a critical business
impact” will drive you above five pages a week. To resolve this, you need to
specify both the type of business impact and the conditions that make it
reasonable to think paging your engineer will help mitigate the issue.
This causes tension, because when a system that is critical to the business
goes down, it is actually a best practice for incident managers fielding
operational calls to proactively page the on-calls for all dependent systems if
there is the slightest suspicion they could be the cause. They are thinking in
terms of mean time to recovery (MTTR), which is the right thing for the
business. But if your platform is a dependency of every team at the business,
and you have not given your on-call engineers and incident managers

-- 266 of 630 --

evidence to rule out your platform, your engineers will get paged constantly,
even when their system isn’t the cause of the incident.
Resolving this tension requires ongoing investment in three additional areas:
1. A strong culture of follow-through on postmortem remediation items—in
particular, those that answer the question “Why did this page happen at
all?” These come from operational reviews, described later in the chapter.
2. A willingness to invest in observability not just for platform team
members, but also for customers and incident managers. The biggest
difference-maker we have seen is synthetic monitoring, described later in
the chapter.
3. A willingness from the platform team’s leadership to push back against
unreasonable expectations of application teams and their leadership,
helping them understand that a burnt-out team of platform engineers with
high turnover will not actually give them the SaaS company level of
support they think they deserve. That can be a difficult conversation,
which is why we stress stakeholder relationships so heavily in
Chapter 10.
Without this investment, trust will be lost. The team’s conditions will be
seen as unreasonable, leading customers to ignore them and escalate
demands for engagement.
3

-- 267 of 630 --

Stage 2: Separate Noncritical Support from On-
Call
Even if stage 1 is executed perfectly, complex platforms with broad use can
still face an overwhelming number of support issues. Sometimes it’s the
critical (off-hours pageable) load that stacks up, but just as often it’s the
low-severity cases that require so much investigation and customer
communication that it takes over 40 hours a week to handle the load. When
you see teams in such a state, you see support queues with a lot of items
open at the end of every week, which is particularly costly because the
incoming on-call engineer needs to catch up on all the context the previous
engineer had. Meanwhile, the frustrated users continue to wait.
Before we get into how to improve this state, we want to cover a non-
solution: having the product manager or engineering manager take on all
noncritical support duties on an ongoing basis, under the assumption that
one person who has all the context will be more efficient at handling it. This
is a bad idea for two reasons:
1. It gives engineers little visibility into user support.
2. Whatever overloaded the engineers will eventually overload that
individual, who has other responsibilities, one of them being to help get
the team out of this state.

-- 268 of 630 --

Instead, you need to break out the noncritical support duties from the on-call
rotation, with a separate business-hours support rotation. This can sound like
a lot of operational load—on a team of, say, six, between the on-call and
support rotations, a third of your engineers are now doing purely operational
work. But there are benefits. By separating the two types of operational
work from each other and from development responsibilities, you improve
the quality of that operational work, allow greater focus for development
work, and make it easier to measure the support load.
That being said, if the combined operational load gets much above 50%, you
are going to have trouble putting sufficient time into improving the
platform. This will lead to challenges in motivating, retaining, and hiring
engineers who are driven by building systems. Thus, the next step is to hire
a specialist.
Stage 3: Hire a Support Specialist
At stage 3, your team has done all the work they can to stay on top of your
support load, but they are still overloaded. The next step is hiring someone
to specialize in taking on the support load. However, at this point you likely
should resist hiring a full-time support engineer—i.e., the type of engineer
hired by large SaaS companies to do this for external customers, and who
builds their career around the role.

-- 269 of 630 --

Why should you resist? To answer that, let’s define some industry
terminology around support engineering tiers:
Tier 1 (T1) support engineer
The initial point of contact for customers seeking technical
assistance. They handle basic customer inquiries and provide general
assistance, typically dealing with common and straightforward issues
that can be resolved using predefined procedures or scripts.
Tier 2 (T2) support engineer
Comes into play when an issue goes beyond the scope of Tier 1. T2
support engineers possess more advanced technical knowledge and
expertise than their T1 counterparts. They typically handle complex
issues that require in-depth analysis, troubleshooting, and problem
solving.
For a platform team just crossing this threshold, the problem with hiring a
support engineer is that most strong T1 support engineers want to move up
to T2 to grow their careers. But platform teams are rarely big enough to
offer two separate roles and a clear path of growth between them. They need
a “unicorn” capable of doing T2 work, but satisfied also spending a lot of
their day doing T1 work. This role is difficult to hire for, and the type of
“fast learner” who excels by quickly acquiring skills will likely seek a new
challenge within 12–24 months if there is no clear path for advancement.

-- 270 of 630 --

How do you deal with this? Before you look for a full-time hire, ask
yourself if your need for a support specialist is truly permanent. Could you
reduce that need over time by investing in training, documentation, or
platform improvements? If the need might only be temporary, then you
should find a skilled support engineer contractor to do both T1 and T2 work,
while you enact the measures to allow the team to function without them.
However, if this is likely to be a permanent need, you have an opportunity.
Don’t hire a succession of short-term contractors. Instead, look inside and
outside the company for people with nontraditional backgrounds (e.g., in
boot camps, IT, and T2 product support engineering) who seem to be “quick
learners” and who want to break into platform engineering. Add them to the
platform team with an expectation that their workload over the first 12
months will be heavily support-focused, but they’ll have opportunities to
grow their software and systems skills in the second year.
At the end of this period many will have developed the skills to move into a
“normal” platform engineering role, and in the meantime you will have
benefited from the contributions of an enthusiastic support engineer.
Chances are that there will have been enough change on the team within this
time frame that you can keep them on, and then restart the process with a
new quick learner to help with your next 24 months.

-- 271 of 630 --

HOW TO SUPPORT CUSTOMERS IN A FAR-FLUNG TIME ZONE

-- 272 of 630 --

A classic example that stretches our recommendation for stage 3 is when a
platform team is asked to support a new acquisition or office in a far-flung
time zone—say, Israel for a US West Coast team, where there’s a 10-hour
offset, so there are no business hours in common. While a lot of platforms
can limit off-hours support to extraordinary issues, it is more difficult for
some, like developer tool platforms, particularly at the stage of onboarding
code and coders from another ecosystem. Here, there is no substitute for
direct support during business hours, either through chat or in person.
Your priority is establishing a clear path to reliable business-hours support
for the new location, which requires you to train someone either local or
time zone–appropriate to provide that support. You have three choices here:
1. The simplest solution is often to ask one of your team members to move
to the new office for the first six months, to train someone there to be part
of your team long-term. That is, of course, an extraordinary ask, so you
usually have to get lucky that someone wants to do this, as opposed to
trying to force someone who’s reluctant about it.
2. The next best solution is a “reverse embed,” where you ask someone
from the new location to join the team at the home office for three to six
months, get some training, then go back. The main downside here is that
you are asking them to uproot their lives and work some tough hours
during that integration period.
3. The last option is to hire a new person in the new office to join the
platform team as a “local support person.” This is the worst option,

-- 273 of 630 --

because they are going to be new to the company, new to your platform,
and new to the people they are working with. That’s a tough position to
be effective in.
We admit, none of these options are pretty—but they’re all much better than
attempting off-hours “best effort” support with your existing team, which is
just going to frustrate everyone and harm the successful onboarding of the
new location or company.
Stage 4: At Scale with an Engineering Support
Organization
At scale, it’s not just one platform team looking to hire support specialists,
but many. At this point it is sustainable to hire support engineers and arrange
them in specialized teams. Now you have the problems of T1 versus T2
staffing, and defining an escalation process between them and the platform
engineering teams. We asked Jordan West, a staff engineer on a data
platform team at one of the FAANG companies, how they handle this
problem at their massive and global scale. What follows is from Jordan.

-- 274 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 275 of 630 --

Our company is large enough to have a company-wide T1 support team
called the Engineering Support Organization (ESO) that handles all
platforms, with each platform team’s on-call rotation taking T2 escalations.
But even with the help of the ESO, it took us iteration to get our support
strategy to a point where we weren’t burning out our team members on the
T2 load. While there is no magic bullet, there were five main aspects of the
strategy that got us there:
Tiering applications with different SLAs
We created different SLAs around on-call service quality and
response time, conditioning them on application tier. It’s important to
note that application tier here doesn’t refer to T1 versus T2 support,
which is more about the depth of knowledge required to address the
problem, but rather the importance of the applications themselves.
Applications that impact the business top line, like the product itself,
or are crucial to important business functions, such as financial
reporting, are Tier 0 or Tier 1 applications. For these tiers, the goal is
to identify and react to incidents before they’re noticed by anyone
else. For the remaining tiers, it’s OK for the on-call rotation to be
notified of issues by customers before we catch them. In practice, this
means having different alert settings across the tiers. Latency, for
example, is set strictly for the observability of Tier 0 and Tier 1
application usage, while the others either have no latency alert

-- 276 of 630 --

enabled or have the thresholds set high enough to catch only
prolonged increases.
Requiring customers to be on-call
For Tier 0 and Tier 1 applications, we require the application team to
have a 24/7 on-call rotation to match our own. The majority of the
time, our production incidents are not caused by underlying
infrastructure but rather by the applications themselves—for a
common example, a sudden increase in traffic, perhaps due to new
logic being rolled out. For this reason, we need to be able to reach the
application team as quickly as they can reach us. Little is more
frustrating to an on-call platform engineer than getting woken up in
the middle of the night because of a misbehaving application and not
being able to do much, if anything, about it.
Hiring systems engineers
We strongly believe in the merged DevOps model, despite mixed
feelings about being on-call. To make the model work, though, there
must be a balance of team members with development and systems
backgrounds. For a time, after a series of reorganizations, we only
hired the former. The result was a languishing body of systems work
that the team members didn’t enjoy doing, around operational tooling
and alert reduction. Changing our approach to hire people with a
systems background (we use the SRE title) had an outsized impact, in

-- 277 of 630 --

two ways. The team now had team members who were motivated to
do the work that had previously sat on the sidelines, but that didn’t
mean systems types worked on systems tasks and engineers on
development, with no interaction. Rather, folks working on these
areas raised the bar across the team, changing its culture. No longer
was it acceptable to allow these areas to languish.
Creating an expert network to do T2 support
Even with the last two steps, at our scale and importance to the
business, the T2 support load was much too high, as the ESO team
was still developing the depth needed to handle anything beyond T1
work. Additionally, going through the new ESO layer was actually a
frustration for our advanced customers who already had deep
knowledge of our platform systems. Our solution to both of these
problems was to develop these advanced customers into a community
of T2 expert engineers, so that they would become the first line of
support for their peers inside their parts of the organization. These
experts are uniquely able to combine an understanding of the
platform with a deep knowledge of the applications. Their peers go to
them first, then the ESO, and finally us. To establish this network, we
used incident reviews and data modeling meetings to identify and
build relationships with senior engineers who either had preexisting
knowledge of the systems we offered or were quick to learn about
them in either context. To incentivize folks to take on this

-- 278 of 630 --

responsibility, the “experts” have a special channel direct to the
platform developers. This channel is open to all to view, but only the
experts and on-call rotation members can post in it. The result is a
more scalable support structure of embedded experts with a fast track
to help whenever they need it—a win on both sides.
Constantly reviewing with the ESO
If you’re going to move some support functions outside of the
platform team, a tight feedback loop is critical. Otherwise, the risk of
not understanding your customer’s pain increases greatly. To address
this, we have a meeting every two weeks between the ESO and the
on-call rotations. The ESO brings threads they have questions about,
and the rotation brings escalations they think could be handled by the
ESO in the future. The ESO also points out areas where our
documentation or tooling could be improved and trends they are
seeing among customers. From these discussions come action items
on how to improve—for example, documenting a process so the ESO
can do it themselves, or developing even better tooling that allows
them to handle it with a few clicks. This turns a repetitive task into a
software problem the team is eager to solve. When this was all done
in the same team, the tooling never got built because there was no
time budget for it. Having a separate ESO team means there is
another leader who’s invested and asks our leader for time and budget
to fix these things for their team.

-- 279 of 630 --

Operational Feedback Practices
The third operational area a platform team needs to invest in is obtaining
feedback. In this section, we’ll identify four essential practices that
empower platform teams to balance feature development and operational
investment before operational problems become acute. These practices
cover the lifecycle of production applications: SLOs and SLAs are informed
by requirements, change management ensures you know what is being
released is of high quality, synthetic monitoring goes beyond basic
observability to actively detect failures in our running systems, and
operational reviews look at recent history to review what is going well or
not and inform upcoming work and areas of focus.
SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional
As you likely know, service level agreements are composed of service level
objectives, which are measured and evaluated by service level indicators
(SLIs), and SLIs feed into error budgets. These are all good practices for a
platform team, but we think error budgets have been oversold and do not
always bring enough benefit relative to the cost of using them.
Before we explain, here’s where we completely agree with the literature on
these topics:
4

-- 280 of 630 --

SLIs are a great way for a platform team’s engineers to monitor issues
with their platform.
SLOs are great for triggering monitoring and driving on-call deep dives.
SLAs comprising a small number of SLOs are a great way for platform
leadership and customers to understand what levels of performance,
efficiency, and reliability the platform and platform team are committed
to providing.
“Failing minutes” of a small number of SLOs can be a good way to talk
about problematic operational issues in a manner that allows leadership
to understand why remedial action is needed.
The last point sounds like error budgets, so what’s the problem? The
problem is that a lot of the literature frames a mature error budget as a
contract, allowing the team to take risks until they exceed this contractual
budget, at which time they must stop all development work to remediate.
This framing was introduced in Chapter 3 of the SRE book, which suggests
that error budgets be used as a blocker for feature development: “As long as
the uptime measured is above the SLO—in other words, as long as there is
error budget remaining—new releases can be pushed.”
Error budgets can be a useful tool to talk about discrepancies between how a
system was planned to be operated versus how it is operating. But even
setting up the conversation this way is taking you toward “us versus them”
finger-pointing between engineers and management over details like
thresholds and false positives, as opposed to focusing on the problem at

-- 281 of 630 --

hand. Some people will acknowledge that point but still think error budgets
are great, because even if they don’t automatically force leaders to
acknowledge an immediate change in the team’s behavior, they at least
prompt a conversation. We agree up to a point, but if you want to get your
customers or their leadership to change their behavior in a specific way, then
the SLOs behind the error budgets need to be high-confidence signals that
those outside your team can relate to.
This requires you to use these three rules when creating customer-facing
SLOs:
The fewer customer-facing SLOs, the better—ideally, a handful.
The point of customer-facing SLOs is helping people outside the
platform team understand you have a problem. The more SLOs you
have, the harder it is for your stakeholders to understand how those
SLOs matter to the business.
They need to minimize false positives.
This is obvious to anyone who has read “The Boy Who Cried Wolf.”
If you were failing your SLO last week but the business kept
chugging along, then why does it matter this week if you are failing
again? This applies even if the underlying signal was real (say, a
transient load spike) but there was no discernible impact to the
business. People outside the platform team have a hard time knowing
how to filter the signal from the noise. This means that, for SLOs that

-- 282 of 630 --

are presented to leaders and customers, eliminating false positives
from the metric is crucial.
False negatives are tolerable, but require explanation and improvement.
Mature leadership and stakeholders should understand that SLOs are
imperfect, so they have to choose between occasional false positives
or occasional false negatives. Occasional false negatives (i.e., bad
customer impacting events not appearing in any SLO) are
embarrassing, but if you follow through to address them, they work
well as a tool for continuous improvement.
Crucially, all of this is the opposite of how a platform team should use SLOs
internally, where they should be most worried about understanding the
operating conditions and risks of the system. This means they should instead
follow these three rules:
More SLOs are better (much more than a handful), to maximize system
coverage.
Do not minimize false positives, as that may mean missing a crucial issue.
Both false negatives and false positives require explanation and
improvement, lest false positives drive your operational load too high.
All this is to say that customer-facing SLOs/error budgets are an expensive
additional cost on top of internal observability, and they are something we
think you should require only when you have teams with issues severe

-- 283 of 630 --

enough to be worth that cost—either chronic availability problems, or
customer perceptions of problems that stem from an unrealistic expectation
of the platform’s capabilities (for example, customers that expect maximum
single-millisecond latencies even though your platform stores their data on
hard disks with much higher seek times). Further, in both cases, violations
of the “error budget” should force a conversation about options and trade-
offs, as opposed to forcing a predetermined action.
Change Management
Change management is rigor around the mechanics of all changes to
production, similar to the best practices for changes to code:
All changes to production should be documented.
All changes to production should be reviewed.
All changes to production should be tested before handling production
load directly.
For those who have been in the industry for a while, “change management”
will be a dirty term. “Surely,” they will say, “for lightweight releases to be
done on a continual basis, we all know such practices should be fully
automated à la continuous integration and deployment, and if this can’t be
done by relying on a platform, it should be implemented through case-by-
case release engineering.”
5

-- 284 of 630 --

In an ideal world, we would fully agree with such a statement as both an
ideal and an eventual goal. Unfortunately, though, platforms usually find full
CI/CD very expensive to implement, and change management is a necessary
precursor to ensure that investment actually occurs. This is because
platforms tend to be stateful and have complex architectures, while
supporting some customers with low tolerance for performance and
availability interruptions. A classic example is a caching platform—if your
CD tools clear the cache as part of a code deployment, you will induce
transient latency spikes, which, if large enough, will directly impact
customer applications. As a result, when implementing CD best practices
like canaries, shadow deployments, and automated rollback, platform
systems require more complex logic than most application systems.
This complexity usually means that the teams worst served by paved path
deployment platforms are other platform teams. Instead, these platform
teams need to invest in release engineering. However, due to the pressure to
release features and the general reluctance among many developers to write
automation, we usually see platform teams underinvesting in this area. This
often remains completely hidden when the initial developers of the platform
are the ones making the production changes, as they usually have deep
knowledge of where the points of risk are and how to work around them.
But as the team grows and changes, this esoteric knowledge is lost, and all it
takes is the wrong person leaving and suddenly there is no one on the team
who can safely touch production.

-- 285 of 630 --

To avoid landing in this situation, you need to invest in change management,
as that will create the feedback that tells you that you are relying on risky
behavior and need to invest in release engineering automation while the
people who understand the system’s sharp edges are still around. This can
be quite simple as a process—just a short writeup on a wiki or chat that has
to be acknowledged by another team member. But you must build a culture
of adherence, using operational reviews to ensure both that the process is
being followed and that automation for risky or toilsome steps is being
invested in.
This is because until the new automation is written, the additional work of
change management adds toil to each change, making engineers less happy
and diverting time from development activities, including building the
automation. Despite this, we’ve witnessed too many widespread business
outages caused by sharp-edged change tools to believe there’s a simpler
solution. If anyone on your team doubts this, refer them back to the Amazon
S3 outage of 2017. The service, which was nine years old at the time and
had hundreds of engineers working on it, suffered a two-hour outage
because of a single wrong parameter entered in a command-line tool.6

-- 286 of 630 --

WARNING
Be careful of letting the platform team go too far with release engineering, turning what should be
platform automation into a full-featured shadow deployment platform. Beyond the costs of duplicated
work, this will create political problems. It doesn’t matter if there are good technical reasons for the
duplication; it gives the impression that the platform engineering teams don’t trust their own stuff, and
that they have so many spare engineers that they can build their own shadow platforms. If a platform
team is spending more than 12 developer months per calendar year on release engineering, they may
be overbuilding it.
Synthetic Monitoring
Enough has been written about the “three pillars” of observability—metrics,
logs, and tracing—that we don’t need to reiterate their value here. We agree
that deep investment in passive monitoring of all of these is crucial for the
operability of your platforms. However, there is one aspect of observability
that we think requires far more investment for platforms than for most other
types of systems: synthetic monitoring. Synthetic monitoring, also called
active monitoring, simulates a user interacting with the production platform;
it measures not just latency and availability but correctness of function, and
it raises alerts when objectives are not met.
As we discussed in Chapter 2, platform teams take operational responsibility
for primitives that they did not develop, be they OSS or vendor systems or
other internal platforms and systems. Each of these brings its own
complexity that makes it difficult to understand where issues will arise and
even more difficult to debug them when they occur. By actively exercising

-- 287 of 630 --

the full system, synthetic monitoring is your main way of understanding
what is happening within and across those primitives. It leads to four
benefits:
End-to-end monitoring
Synthetic monitoring covers gaps in passive monitoring and alerts
you to real issues before your customers report them. This is
especially useful for SLOs, where synthetic monitors not only can
observe the direct behavior of calling APIs (latency, throughput, error
codes) from a client but, more importantly, can compose end-to-end
scenarios calling multiple APIs together, similar to what your
customers do. Thus, synthetic monitors are usually the best way of
monitoring the availability and performance characteristics that your
customers will be seeing.
Customer understanding
Both the development and the operation of synthetic tests force
platform engineers to get firsthand experience developing an
application that runs on their platform. This means that even though
the work the monitoring application does is synthetic, it gives a lot of
the same feedback benefits as dogfooding. For example, if flakiness
in an API call is causing a false alarm in your synthetic monitors, it’s
likely bothering your customers too (or it bothered them and they’ve
7

-- 288 of 630 --

hid it in a retry loop, which will cause even worse problems
eventually).
Operational system understanding
Even if debugging a flaky synthetic test doesn’t preemptively identify
a customer-impacting issue, your engineers will get real experience
troubleshooting issues in the production platform. This practice
should drive down the MTTR when they eventually need to handle
real issues.
Triangulation
When a customer is having issues, the well-understood nature of the
synthetic test load often helps with triangulation, letting you easily
determine whether the problem is in the platform for all users, or just
in how the customer is using it. If the synthetic load is seeing it, you
will often have a lot more historical data available to understand
which system component is the cause.
When Ian was building industry-foundational platforms at AWS, synthetic
monitoring was used in place of almost all functional integration testing
under the argument that if you wanted to test for something before every
release, wouldn’t you want to ensure that the same issue was not happening
in production? Based on this experience, he estimates the cost of doing this
well at 25% of ongoing development time and 10% of the platform’s
resource cost. Your platform may not have the same scale and complexity as

-- 289 of 630 --

AWS, but it would be unwise to think your investment should be drastically
less.
Operational Reviews
All the practices covered to this point create data about your operational
health. Operational reviews close the loop to drive action. They are a
practice from seasoned operations organizations in which engineers and
management come together on a regular cadence (usually weekly) to review
broad measures like SLO metrics as well as specifics like incident
postmortems. They leverage human attention to analyze data as a group,
enabling the identification of early outliers, bad trends, and broader lessons.
With management and engineering actively engaged, operational reviews
create a shared understanding of nascent problems that drives action well
ahead of them becoming chronic. Here are a few of our observations
regarding this practice.
Operational reviews are essential for platform teams
For those coming from an application development background, operational
reviews likely appear nonessential at best and burdensome at worst. They
can feel like grunt work to prove you need to spend more time building a
system that doesn’t require such reviews. Before Ian joined AWS, he spent
three years working on application systems that rendered parts of the live
Amazon.com website, and he held exactly this view. While the algorithms

-- 290 of 630 --

driving his application code were complex, the systems were not, because
the underlying platforms abstracted most of the complexity away. His team
easily managed fewer than two on-call pages a week and could avoid doing
formal operational reviews, all while patting themselves on the backs for
being “operationally excellent.”
Ian got a rude shock when he moved into AWS in 2008, to work on a
platform product called EMR. Even with a lower volume of use and a
considerably simpler codebase, the operational load was much higher. Some
of this was user support, but just as much came from direct operational
issues, caused by the fact that the system was composed of many underlying
systems (including both other AWS services and substantial OSS). In this
relatively small team of five, the practice of operational reviews was the
only thing that kept small problems from mushrooming to dominate the time
of everyone on the team.
Keep team reviews simple and rigorous
At the team level, the basics of operational reviews are that the team does a
30- or 60-minute weekly review of:
Pages and lower-severity on-call issues
Customer support issues
Incident/outage postmortems
Production changes

-- 291 of 630 --

Highly relevant SLIs and SLOs (often done in what is called a
“dashboard review,” looking at trends)
Each meeting requires some amount of curation and preparation, which
generally should be done by the person who just came off being on-call.
Org-level reviews are essential, but put practice over process
Getting team-level meetings to the point where they drive the right action is
a bit of an art specific to your company’s culture. With newly formed teams
or newly hired managers, it’s easy for them to devolve into pointless
theatrics that don’t have any value. This is why it’s important to do at least
one higher-level organization review, at least monthly, to develop a broader
cultural understanding of how good meetings work. There are two essential
things to cover:
Postmortems for the highest-impact incidents/outages
Some metric-level review with discussion of outliers (for example,
looking at SLOs, support metrics, or pager metrics)
An important aspect at this level is that the meeting is well-curated;
information presented and discussed should be relevant to the broader
audience. We have found success asking our SREs to drive these reviews;
they have the technical skill to ensure that time is not wasted on inessential
detail, and (as we covered in Chapter 4) they are usually highly motivated
by these types of social problems.

-- 292 of 630 --

WARNING
As much as we recommend an operational review practice, we have seen some leaders overfocus on a
systematic and rigorous metric-driven process, missing the point that each platform team’s particular
issues are situational. If you ask your platform team leaders to spend time on things that don’t have
any bearing on their situation, you are making them spend less time on things that would have an
actual impact on the platform operations.
Leadership engagement drives the right outcomes
The point of operational reviews is to close the feedback loop by shifting
engineering time in response to the operational data that the team is
receiving. If the leaders who need to make those calls are not actively part
of the meeting, then you cannot close this loop. Engineering managers need
to be engaged, in a blameless fashion, to effectively drive forward
understanding of issues and prioritize actions. This makes it clear to
platform engineers and their customers that the platform leaders are
accountable for maintaining a well-informed balance between operations
and feature investments, putting the platform on a path to a sustainable
future.
Wrapping Up
If you come from a systems background, there may have been little new to
you here—as discussed in Chapter 4, a large part of the reason why the
“software versus systems” divide has persisted is that the systems side

-- 293 of 630 --

almost always took operational discipline seriously. We wrote this chapter
for those of you with a development background, for whom it’s important to
understand that succeeding in operating platforms relies heavily on
discipline in on-call, user support, and operational practices. If you find
yourself in a team where subpar behavior has become the norm, it’s your
responsibility to create better practices that address areas of clear pain and
do the work to raise the bar.
See Jason’s article on this at https://oreil.ly/MxNyb.
To spell this out, if each person is on-call only 25% of the time, you need four or five people to make
a one-week-on, three-weeks-off rota, with a buffer for vacations, illness, and other time off.
And as those with direct experience know, this is a bit of a mirage; large SaaS companies go out of
their way to protect their experts who could help remediate specific customer issues the fastest.
For more information, see for example Implementing Service Level Objectives by Alex Hidalgo
(O’Reilly).
The cautious word “directly” is used here because some types of “testing in production,” such as
shadow deployments, are good practices for platforms since they are highly unlikely to impact
customers. However, overreliance on canaries to detect issues, since they impact customers at just a
small scale, is more problematic—they are a safety mechanism, not a testing mechanism.
Per Amazon, “At 9:37AM PST, an authorized S3 team member using an established playbook
executed a command which was intended to remove a small number of servers for one of the S3
subsystems that is used by the S3 billing process. Unfortunately, one of the inputs to the command
was entered incorrectly and a larger set of servers was removed than intended.”
1
2
3
4
5
6

-- 294 of 630 --

Having your own team use the systems you are building for your customers, especially acting as
early adopters and testers.
7

-- 295 of 630 --

Chapter 7. Planning and Delivery
The best laid schemes o’ mice an’ men / Gang aft a-gley.
—Robert Burns
We have seen platform engineering initiatives and leadership fail for many
reasons. The most difficult failures happened when the team was building
the right things, but not demonstrating it to the organization. Sometimes,
these teams had insufficiently planned their projects and were caught in a
long slog, building in what seemed like the right direction but taking far too
long to deliver real value. In other cases the team had planned for
incremental delivery but gotten unlucky with operational events beyond
their control. They made things worse by failing to communicate the impact
of these events to their customers, either flooding them with too much
information or communicating too little.
Whether the team is failing to plan, failing to incrementally execute, or
failing to educate their stakeholders on the current state of things, the view
of those outside the organization is the same: this team isn’t delivering. To
help you avoid this outcome, in this chapter we’ll introduce our best
practices around planning and delivery for a platform organization. In the
first section, we focus on planning long projects, documenting the details
that can get missed when teams make optimistic assumptions about
timelines and value. The second section focuses on planning your team’s

-- 296 of 630 --

roadmap from the bottom up: we’ll discuss how to balance product and
project plans with other essential platform work to ensure the plan’s
milestones are realistic. We finish the chapter by introducing Wins and
Challenges, a communication mechanism to keep partners in sync with how
the team is delivering on these plans, including what unexpected things are
delaying them.
People sometimes think Agile practices are the only planning a team should
ever do, lest they fall into the waterfall trap. But as a platform engineering
team, your work is far too complex to leave solely to what can be planned
in a sprint (or three!). The guidelines in this chapter are intended to be
layered on top of day-to-day Agile practices to get the best of both worlds.
Planning Long-Running Projects
One key distinction between platform engineering and much of application
engineering is that platform projects often have significantly longer
timelines. Building, testing, and migrating to a new system can take months
or even years, depending on the size of your company. It’s not uncommon
for a platform team to work for months on something with no user-visible
output, including up-front research time that produces little more than proof
of project feasibility. This can be frustrating to leaders who are accustomed
to frequent release cadences. If you hate waiting for customer impact,
working on platforms can test your patience.

-- 297 of 630 --

As a platform leader, you must get comfortable with overseeing big, long-
running projects and helping teams break them down into incremental
milestones. Your teams will need your help to figure out milestones and
discussion points to guide their efforts. And the best place to start is by
clarifying what the project is.
Clarifying Goals and Requirements in a Proposal
Document
If you want your long-running projects to go well, everyone should have an
idea of what you’re trying to achieve in the first place. The project leads
need to write down their ideas in a proposal or requirements document for
management and other engineers to review and evaluate. Note that this is
not a classical engineering design document. Important elements of the
design should be covered, but engineering design is usually just one of the
major factors that should be considered. We have also seen consideration of
implementation costs, migration costs, and timelines or other requirements
coming from customers.
We are both fond of Amazon-style six-pagers, but we know that getting
your company to adopt this specific style might not be appropriate. Ignoring
the specific document format, the most important takeaway from this
exercise is to write a proposal that covers these five key elements:
Background, tenets, and guidelines
1

-- 298 of 630 --

Describe the current situation, providing any relevant information as
to how you got here, and establish any core tenets, requirements, or
guidelines; for instance, “We must support cross-regional failover” or
“We should be prepared to support X scaling up in the next Y
months.” Marc Brooker captures the importance of this section:
setting a baseline by documenting the current state allows you to
resolve fundamental disagreements early in the process.
Details of the problem
This is where you go into depth about the problem you need to solve.
A classic one-pager by Leslie Lamport, “State the Problem Before
Describing the Solution”, observes that outlining the problem before
proposing a solution makes it easier for readers to imagine possible
solutions beyond the ones proposed. Often, this step also reveals
gaps in the project leads’ understanding of the problem, forcing them
to gather more details and truly understand what they are proposing.
Overview of possible solutions
This section should outline all reasonable options for a solution and
your good-faith evaluation of their major pros and cons. It’s
important to go through this step before detailing the preferred
solution, to head off counterproposals of solutions you’ve already
rejected. Otherwise, you’re likely to get comments like “Can’t this be
done much more cheaply, as in X?” and “Aren’t you thinking way

-- 299 of 630 --

too small and short term? We need to restart with new technology
Y!” Sometimes you might hear both from the same person, as they
personally weigh the trade-offs.
Proposed solution and rationale
State the solution you’ve chosen and explain the rationale for your
decision, analyzing any constraints (such as time horizon) and other
relevant factors.
How long should this section be? The trite but true answer is
“whatever is necessary to convince your audience,” which will vary
according to company culture and how contentious the decision is.
That said, this shouldn’t be a 20-page monster document where you
attempt to prove your thoroughness by drowning the reader in
details. Try to distill the top three to five factors and make an
argument for why they take priority over other concerns.
Plan of action
You’ll formulate a detailed plan in the next step of the planning
process, but for this document, paint a picture of the implementation.
What does “done” look like, and on what timelines? Lay out some
early to medium-term milestones and metrics for measuring success.
If they are pertinent, be sure to address nontechnical concerns like
timing, staffing, and organizational impact as well.

-- 300 of 630 --

Once the document is written, review it with management (including
product management) and lead engineers in one or more meetings to debate
the merits and get buy-in. If you choose to follow the Amazon style, you’ll
start those meetings with ~20 minutes of reading followed by “walking the
doc,” taking the group from section to section in the order they appear in
the document. Either way, the goal of these meetings is agreement that the
project is worthwhile and that an action plan should be created to estimate
the cost of implementation and get final approval to begin work.
Going from Proposal to Action Plan
Once you’ve gained buy-in for your proposal, there is still some writing to
be done before implementation. You’ll want to create a thorough design
document aimed at ensuring the technical aspects are well considered,
which should usually be reviewed by lead engineers. On top of that, we
have found a lot of value in an “action plan” document, going into a lot
more detail than what was in the project proposal. Important considerations
to cover are:
Testing and acceptance criteria
A major project will need some testing. Has the team written
anything down about this? You don’t need a full testing plan on day
one, but someone should be assigned to write a plan that you’ll track
as part of the project execution. Testing also implies acceptance
2

-- 301 of 630 --

criteria: what will you be validating with these tests? We don’t
expect perfect acceptance criteria to start with, but some baseline
requirements are important as you plan for testing.
Analyzing dependencies
What other teams will need to work on this project? Will the project
need to integrate with another system? Do you have buy-in, and
possibly participation, from the team that owns that system?
The more dependencies a project has, the harder it will be to deliver.
One major dependency that many platform teams neglect is the work
for a migration. If this project requires your customers to migrate in
order to complete the delivery, this is a major piece of dependency
analysis that you should estimate as part of the project proposal.
Estimating headcount
Getting your project approved doesn’t guarantee that you’ll get
everyone you want to work on it. As we cover later in this chapter,
“funded” big projects are frequently in contention with other
demands on the team’s time. You need to guesstimate how many
engineers you’ll need on the project’s central engineering team, and
also whether you might need personnel surges for testing,
integration, migration, etc.
Driving adoption

-- 302 of 630 --

If you are building something that other engineers will use directly
(rather than an internal system component), you should have a plan
for driving adoption. This is typically where product managers
contribute their expertise. If you don’t have a product manager, make
sure you plan to communicate what you’re building so that
customers understand its purpose and are excited to use it. You may
want to answer questions such as:
What will you call the new product or feature? (Having the right
name early makes later discussions much easier to follow.)
Have you lined up teams to be early adopters?
Will this offering require extensive documentation?
Do you need to teach people how to use your new product?
Should you do other “marketing” activities, like giving talks to
the wider team or writing internal blog posts?
How will you announce the launch?
Too often, project leaders assume that “if you build it, they will
come.” But even for internal projects, you can seldom guarantee
eager adoption if you don’t spend time with the target users and
understand their needs.
Milestones

-- 303 of 630 --

The best way to bring these considerations together and manage the
project implementation is to state them as a series of milestones. We
prefer to be highly concrete for the first 12 months, using monthly
milestones that fall back to quarterly only for later stages where there
is less clarity. For multiyear projects, we also like to have some
projections of how the previous elements (estimated headcount,
dependencies, etc.) will evolve in future years, as it gives a strong
indication of where we have risks from “unknown unknowns” that
we can’t yet resolve. These milestones form the basis of your
incremental delivery; the more you can create milestones that not
only deliver technical capabilities but also support business
outcomes, the better.

-- 304 of 630 --

BEWARE BRINGING IN PROJECT MANAGERS TOO EARLY
At the point of creating an action plan, it’s tempting for platform leaders to
assign the project to a project manager to “own” for its duration. The
expectation is that the project manager can create a Gantt chart to map out
all the project’s dependencies and the estimated work for each task, giving
the team confidence in tracking its execution.
In our experience, this doesn’t usually work out well. Instead of creating
confidence, involving a project manager too early in a project creates a
culture of scheduling bureaucracy, and reduces the engagement from the
engineering lead and product manager. Without their input in planning, the
estimates often become overly conservative and less accurate. For these
reasons, we advise you to save your project manager firepower for times
where the scheduling details create major risks for the project—for
example:
The project has a firm deadline.
The project has a large number of task dependencies.
Your company has a culture of bureaucracy around cooperating (for
instance, an attitude that no matter how small the ask, “if it’s not
scheduled in this quarter’s OKRs, you have to wait until next quarter”).
Avoiding the Long Slog

-- 305 of 630 --

Most engineers start long projects with a great degree of hope and optimism
—if that wasn’t the case, we’d probably start far fewer multiyear projects!
It’s one thing to go into a project knowing that it will take a long time, but
some projects that shouldn’t be so lengthy still end up dragging on and on.
To help you avoid that fate, this section examines some of the reasons that
otherwise reasonable platform projects turn into never-ending slogs.
Overreach
Some projects attempt to do more than is realistic for the time frame or
product they are part of.
For example, a team we know was redesigning an internal storage system.
This storage system had worked well for the company for years for a
particular set of use cases, but it was inefficient and lacked some security
and performance features that would make it sustainable in the long run.
While planning the redesign, the team kept adding new goals. Not only
would the new system correct those security and performance gaps, but it
would also modernize how the company thought about storage by getting
rid of all network-attached, file-based storage options.
The team implemented diligently and rolled out the new system to a new
environment that removed access to the old network-attached storage
options. They then tried to migrate users into the new system, and riots
ensued (metaphorically, but only just).

-- 306 of 630 --

It turned out that the users were comfortable with command-line file tools
and with scripting against POSIX-based filesystems. They didn’t
understand how to use the new APIs for things that they had previously
done through simple files, and they didn’t want to migrate every script. It
became clear that the core assumption of removing the network-attached
storage option was not going to work, and the team had to take their design
back to the drawing board.
This failure is an example of overreach. The system rewrite was always
going to be a big project, but because the team knew it would be hard, they
started to believe that they should make the absolute most of the
opportunity and go from “big project” to “revolutionary project.” There was
also an element of ivory-tower thinking, an assumption that they knew
better than their users. The team ended up trying to launch a system that
was too heavy to get into orbit. (In Chapter 8, we’ll talk about techniques to
avoid this, particularly around rearchitectures.)
Starting too big
In Chapter 5, we discussed the challenge of getting customers to tell you
what they want you to build. This in turn can lead to the team struggling to
write a project proposal, because they are unwilling or unable to commit to
a proposed solution that might exclude some customer group. Instead, the
proposals start to look like increasingly complex design specifications
meant to cover all possible eventualities.

-- 307 of 630 --

While building good products is hard, and building good platforms is hard,
building a complex platform from scratch for a diverse user base might well
be impossible. It’s good to keep Gall’s law in mind when you start new
platform projects:
A complex system that works is invariably found to have evolved from
a simple system that worked. The inverse proposition also appears to
be true: A complex system designed from scratch never works and
cannot be made to work. You have to start over, beginning with a
working simple system.
When you say that you are trying to build, from scratch, a new platform that
needs detailed customer design input from a diverse set of customers, you
reveal a few things:
1. This is a novel complex system, not a system that is the internal delivery
of a well-known platform or an evolution of an existing simple platform.
2. You don’t really know what needs to happen to build this system, hence
the desire to have your customers tell you what they need and give you
cover to build things.
3. You don’t have product management coverage to even begin to
understand the nuances of your customers and their needs.
4. You have no business building this platform in this way.
3

-- 308 of 630 --

You may be in an impossible situation. If you have been given a grandiose
central mandate to build a brand-new thing, and won this mandate without
previously having a clear idea of what needs to happen (perhaps due to
internal politics, naivete, or other factors), you are set up for failure. Sorry
to be the bearers of bad news, but if you’ve promised a complete platform
for all customers, you are going to have a very hard time delivering on this
promise.
Writing a concrete proposal that your customers can understand and critique
is one way to make sure that you aren’t getting into this situation. If you
can’t figure out how to write this document, it’s a sign that you may have
bitten off more than you can chew, and the best bet might be to scope down
your efforts. As we suggested in Chapter 5, start by looking at the boring
parts of the new platform, the more obvious features, and look for the scope
that you can confidently define in a proposal.
Unclear problem space
With the storage system project we described earlier, at least the team had
an underlying problem they knew they needed to solve. So many platform
projects fail because no one is quite sure exactly what problem they are
solving. This is why it is so valuable to spend some time up front thinking
about—and writing down—your project goals and interrogating your
assumptions, before you invest a lot of time and money.

-- 309 of 630 --

It’s tempting for platform teams to believe their job is to make everyone
happy by building a generic system that will meet all needs. Rather than
choosing one of the kinds of solutions outlined in Chapter 2, they choose
both a paved path and a railway approach. By failing to commit to one
approach, they end up unable to meet the needs of the moment. For
example, a team might try to build a generic solution to a broad problem
(paved path) but also try to use a railway approach by, say, building a cool
drag-and-drop UI to make it easy for other teams to configure and tweak the
underlying system. When these solutions don’t work out, too often teams
double down on them rather than declaring these types of investments as
failures. They insist that they just need to find the right use case for their
cool UI, or the right users who need exactly what the generic offering can
provide. A former colleague of ours in the product engineering world used
to call this behavior “sh*terating.”
Flailing about looking for product fit is one thing when you’re building a
product at a startup with a “move fast and break things” mandate. It’s quite
another thing in the platform world, where this behavior gives platform
teams a bad name.
It’s critical to define the problem that your initiative is trying to solve,
hypothesize a solution, provide evidence that the proposed solution can
solve the problem, and (ideally) provide metrics to gauge if the solution is
working. You’ll get the best proposal by teaming up a staff engineer who
can provide technical insight with a product manager to support the

-- 310 of 630 --

customer perspective. Without this up-front work, you’re likely to end up in
the perpetual situation where it seems just one more feature is needed for
your silver bullet solution to get adopted. That’s why we advocate thorough
documentation, beginning with a concrete proposal before the project is
even started.
Project team turnover
Projects also drag on when the team is unstable. Losing people who know
about the project slows everyone down. Not only do you lose people who
could have done the work, but you also then have to find new people to add
to the project, train them on its details, and get them effectively gelled with
the rest of the team. All of this hinders productivity. Unfortunately, team
turnover is often caused by projects that are already dragging on, which
leads to a vicious cycle of project delays and demoralized team members
who quit or move to other projects, in turn delaying the current project even
more.
This is one of the reasons that documenting the proposal and plans is so
important. As Cian Synnott, senior staff engineer at Datadog, told us: “I’ve
often seen a new senior engineer added to a team who questions everything.
That’s good, and part of team formation in a way, but being able to say
‘yeah, we’re doing this project this way and <here’s why>’ is a great way to
channel their energy and keep it positive.”

-- 311 of 630 --

Even as a senior leader, you may not have perfect control over working
conditions that contribute to turnover; for example, if the company isn’t
paying enough to retain people in a hot market, that may be beyond your
ability to fix. But there are other factors within your control. If the
platforms you own are always on fire, your team might be turning over
because they’re burned out on operational work. Avoiding this situation, or
removing your team from it, requires a different type of planning, as we’ll
show you in the next section.
Bottom-Up Roadmap Planning
The product roadmaps described in Chapter 5 represent the plan for adding
new features to a platform. For teams not facing delivery or operational
pressures, they can be sufficient to function as the only plan used to ensure
the team is on the right track to deliver customer value. However, once a
team is under delivery or operational pressure, you need to invest in a
second, higher-fidelity roadmap, called a bottom-up roadmap.
What causes this change? There’s an old Borscht Belt joke about a pair of
customers complaining, “The food at this place is really terrible…and such
small portions!” Similarly, a platform’s stakeholders often complain, “The
stability of this platform is so terrible…and they never ship our features on
time!” Because scaled platforms are so complex and often support business-
critical applications, platform teams need to invest in operations

-- 312 of 630 --

proactively. This means not only maintaining systems, but also changing
them to handle increased scale. Without proper planning in place to manage
expectations of the feature delivery schedule, platform teams find
themselves neglecting operational work, and they eventually get stuck in
operational hell. This could mean:
Mitigating issues with “Band-Aid” patches that add to the system’s
complexity and create technical debt
Missing committed deadlines for new features, experiencing recurring
operational events, and disappointing customers
Burning engineers out with heavy operational workloads and stress
Avoiding this outcome requires augmenting feature delivery plans with the
work needed to operate and operationally improve the platform. The next
subsections describe three pools of work you’ll need to estimate. First,
there’s the keep the lights on (KTLO) work: the essential operational tasks
that keep systems and services running smoothly. Second, you have
executive mandates, (almost) nonnegotiable projects handed down from
executive leadership. Third, you have system improvements, which are
exactly what they sound like: the work to improve the platform’s
operations, efficiency, security, reliability, and compliance. In the final
subsection, we talk about how to merge this all together, as illustrated in
Figure 7-1.

-- 313 of 630 --

Figure 7-1. The elements of a bottom-up roadmap
“Keep the Lights On” Work
You might call this “operations,” but KTLO viscerally captures an
engineering team’s truly nondiscretionary operational work—the absolute
essentials required to keep the business running over the next 12 months.
This is usually a short list of categories:
Staffing on-call incident response
Staffing essential user support (on-call or otherwise)
Remediating operational and security incidents and critical postmortem
action items
If you’ve followed our advice in Chapter 6 and broken out on-call and
support duties into rotations, you should be able to estimate costs for the
first two items using your historical data. The third item is the most difficult
to estimate, since it involves “unknown unknowns” about future events.
Our advice is to look at the volume of this work that the team performed

-- 314 of 630 --

over the last planning period, but strike off any events or action items that
took up more than about two months of engineering time. The threshold is
somewhat arbitrary, but we would argue that it isn’t right to plan with an
expectation of having future large operational or security events.
Mandates
Mandates are top-down edicts, things that the executive leadership team
says must be done, often with hard timelines. They might include projects
like:
Migrations driven by other platform and infrastructure teams
Infrastructure initiatives, like moving to a new cloud provider,
integrating after an acquisition, or building out a new geographic region
Initiatives to improve company compliance, security or operational
posture (for instance, deprecating old open source dependencies or
achieving HIPAA compliance)
Large “strategic” business initiatives that are intended to override local
priorities (for instance, “we need to have a lot more AI features in all our
products”)
Mandates present a planning contradiction. There are inevitably mandates
that are claimed to be essential at the beginning of the planning process that
will be killed once the company realizes the total amount of work involved
and how that will cut into other higher-value priorities. This means while no

-- 315 of 630 --

single team can just say “no” to these mandates, if you plan with the
assumption that you have to do all of them, then the rest of your plan will
get derailed.
Thus, estimating the net impact of mandates means taking your best guess
at which are both likely to move forward and of high impact on your team,
and estimating the effort they will take. This is an art that requires some
political awareness and good communication with the executive in your
leadership tree who can have some sway on whether proposed mandates
move forward. When mandates threaten to overburden your team, tell that
executive as soon as possible, so they can give feedback to the leadership
team and hopefully help whittle down the list to the truly essential.
System Improvements
While KTLO is the essential operational work for a system supporting a
steadily growing business, it’s not the only needed work. KTLO doesn’t
include work that falls into the category of “if the system is not improved
soon, it will hurt the company in the intermediate term, by increasing either
the likelihood of a problem or the scope of its negative impact.” This work
arises from three general directions: ongoing growth in scale pushing the
system closer to its limits, the system’s natural deterioration in a changing
environment (sometimes called “software rot”), and standards rising as the
platform and its applications become more important to the business.

-- 316 of 630 --

A lot of organizations call this SRE work. We call it “system
improvements,” because we have found that the term SRE leads people to
assume that all of the work is about improving reliability, whereas we think
there are other important categories. System improvements generally fall
into one of three buckets:
Reliability and operability
Efficiency and performance
Security and compliance
We suggest creating three separate stack rank lists, one for each category,
since the audience for each category’s list will be different. This separation
also helps the individual stack ranks, by allowing you to compare costs and
impact within, rather than across, categories.
Reliability and operability improvements
This work has to do with making system operations less costly, risky, or
fault-prone. Some examples are:
Reducing toil
Automating away the hands-on engineering work that scales linearly
with the size of the system not only reduces the amount of KTLO
work but, by taking the human element out, also reduces the risk of
outages.

-- 317 of 630 --

Improving testing capabilities
If certain bugs continuously end up in production, you might need to
invest in new ways of doing unit tests, introduce load testing or fuzz
testing, or improve flaky integration tests.
Release engineering
We introduced release engineering in Chapter 6. Specific investments
here may be new capabilities, like blue/green testing or canary and
shadow deployments.
Observability
While some work to improve observability is small and easy to fit in,
other projects, like creating a new synthetic monitoring platform or
adding a new type of observability such as APM, will happen only if
they are planned and prioritized.
Reducing variations
Much of a platform’s technical debt—far more than for applications
—comes from variations in the software it runs in production,
usually stemming from decisions to enable new use cases “the fast
way” rather than “the right way.” These variations can include, for
example, clients using deprecated versions of APIs, keeping old
versions of the platform to support clients who haven’t migrated,
customer-specific feature flags that have not been removed, or old

-- 318 of 630 --

versions of external dependencies. These often have the most impact
during deployments, when slight differences are easily forgotten by
the operator, leading to failures.
System changes
These include changes to the system itself to improve reliability: for
example, changing a hashing algorithm, tuning a garbage collector,
introducing a cache, or swapping out buggy open source libraries.
To find candidates for these projects, look at the lower-priority action items
that come out of postmortems. You should also be looking at your
customers’ postmortems to identify guardrails that you can build in your
platform that will eliminate failures for them.
We have had some success by proactively challenging teams to identify
prominent issues in their systems in a “system risk register” as a
centralized, SRE-led project. However, without strong leadership, such
efforts can become highly bureaucratic and return little value. Seek
feedback when undertaking such a task to ensure that the process will drive
action, rather than create a long list that is immediately forgotten.
Efficiency and performance improvements
Since they own the first layer of software over the underlying infrastructure,
platform teams usually have far more responsibility for cost efficiency than

-- 319 of 630 --

their application team customers. However, too often they put little work
into that responsibility, underinvesting until a CFO or CTO hears an
anecdote about waste and realizes that no one is paying attention to costs.
At this point, the platform teams are pushed to do a big one-off drive that
randomizes everyone but fixes the immediate waste, and follow it with a
heavyweight program to try to avoid it in the future. Unfortunately, such
programs, often called “chargebacks,” are usually so bureaucratic and rife
with untested assumptions that they cause as many problems as they solve.
Doing better than this requires platform teams to constantly invest in
efficiency improvements. We have found this is often done poorly because
a lot of people miss that the work is split into two categories: FinOps, which
is done (at scale) by a team of dedicated specialists, and performance
engineering, which is best done by systems engineers within each platform
team, and whose larger projects should be included in planning for each
team. In the rest of this section, we describe the roles and division of labor.
FinOps, short for “financial operations,” is a relatively new discipline born
out of the complexity of dynamic cloud usage and pricing models. The
FinOps Foundation defines it as “the practice of bringing a financial
accountability cultural change to the variable spend model of cloud,
enabling distributed engineering and business teams to make trade-offs
between speed, cost, and quality in their cloud architecture and investment
decisions.”

-- 320 of 630 --

The types of things FinOps teams do well are:
Tagging cloud and infrastructure resources for ownership
Creating spend reports for financial and engineering leaders
Using the right reservation duration for virtual machines (instances)
“Rightsizing” servers and instances to fit the load, including removing
unused ones
Negotiating discounts with cloud vendors
Working with platform teams to build better models for predicting future
costs and optimization opportunities based on customer demand
Aren’t there vendor tools that do this for you? Well, yes, but in our
experience, most engineering teams and managers struggle to incorporate
the complex decisions and actions they require into their regular workflow.
It needs to be someone’s primary responsibility. The cloud allows you to
burn cash quickly in too many ways, and you need someone guarding
against that. This is a large enough problem that you need a FinOps
specialist once the engineering organization gets to about 200 engineers.
In smaller organizations, we often assign this responsibility as a part-time
role to the systems engineers on our compute platform teams, because they
are already close to the cloud vendors, and because compute use cases often
carry the most cost complexity. But while FinOps work is complex, most
systems engineers don’t enjoy it as a full-time role, because it is not “hands-
on” enough in terms of production systems. What they do love doing is the

-- 321 of 630 --

second category of efficiency improvements: performance engineering, a
system-wide approach to design, analysis, and tuning systems for
performance and efficiency. When performance engineering leads to well-
tuned systems, it can create the “quick wins” CTOs and finance teams love,
where weeks of work produce hundreds of thousands of dollars in yearly
savings. But doing this requires deep knowledge of the production
platforms.
Companies often respond to this need by creating a “performance team,”
hiring one or more performance experts to focus full-time on the company’s
highest-impact performance engineering problems. Unfortunately, few
engineering organizations are large enough to have sufficient hard problems
to motivate experts. So, they tend to hire someone more junior, then run
into the challenges of “specialist as evangelist” we described back in
Chapter 4, where the engineer is more interested in lecturing about the way
things should happen rather than fixing the problems on the ground.
Exacerbating these problems is that the specialist’s “actual” engineering job
is changing other teams’ systems, a trust barrier that’s sometimes hard even
for experts to cross.
Thus, outside of huge enterprises with thousands of engineers, you’re
unlikely to find the unicorn candidate for such a full-time job. The more
productive path is to give this responsibility to the systems engineers on
your platform teams. In our experience, these folks read all the
4

-- 322 of 630 --

performance-tuning material they can get their hands on and are chomping
at the bit to put it into practice. They just need free rein to do it.
So, have the FinOps team lead an ongoing cost-efficiency investigation
program that creates time for each team’s systems engineers to explore
high-potential efficiency improvements. Then, in your bottom-up planning
processes, estimate the implementation costs of the highest-value ones,
stack rank them by cost/benefits, and prioritize them alongside other
systems improvements.
Security and compliance improvements
Last, we have system improvements that increase your security posture or
your compliance with regulatory/customer standards. Security engineering
is a discipline of its own, and despite the many books that have been written
about it, the industry is underinvesting in it. The log4shell zero-day
vulnerability in 2021 dramatically demonstrated how far a lot of companies
are from being able to patch critical exploits in a reasonable amount of
time, let alone from keeping up to date generally.
Security engineering is easily forgotten by application and platform teams
until an incident occurs. But building large security engineering teams
doesn’t work either. While they provide great analysis of security and
compliance issues and implementation trade-offs, it’s usually hard for them
to make substantial changes to systems owned by other teams, particularly

-- 323 of 630 --

when those changes are design or product-level decisions. This work is best
done by platform teams themselves, using the independent security
engineering organization to help advocate for, compile, evaluate, and
consult on projects.
Some of these projects will be about fundamental changes to platform
architecture—we’ll discuss how to handle those in Chapter 8. Some will be
incremental improvements in the current system, similar to other reliability
projects. Furthermore, just like reliability projects, their value will be more
about reducing probabilistic risk, as opposed to clearly knowing something
has been accomplished. So, just as they do with reliability work, platform
teams need to constantly evaluate their highest-value security projects, and
invest in them alongside other system improvements.
Bringing It All Together
This section completes our discussion of bottom-up planning with a look at
the planning cycle. You should now have the following artifacts:
A nonnegotiable estimate of KTLO work
An estimate of all “likely nonnegotiable” mandated projects
Your product roadmap, which lists the new things customers and
stakeholders want out of your platform (this should include ideas from
the platform engineering teams themselves, not just work defined by
product management)

-- 324 of 630 --

Three stacked-rank lists of projects to improve efficiency, reliability, and
security
Let’s look at the important factors in turning this into a concrete plan.
Cadence
How often should you be creating lists, estimates, and plans? The default
approach is to do this whenever your company requires you to. However,
since application-centric organizations can get away with doing much less
(and less rigorous) planning, they probably won’t ask for it as often as you
need to do it to keep them satisfied. Our preference for platform teams is to
do “deep” from-scratch planning annually, then a lighter refresh in the other
three quarters.
Merging lists
How do you merge all those lists of potential projects? It depends, not just
on the state of your platform but on how people perceive the state of your
platform. We can offer a few heuristics to guide you:
KTLO work should account for no more than 40% of your team’s
workload.
Any more than that and you risk burning out your team.

-- 325 of 630 --

Individual system improvement projects should not take longer than
three developer months.
Unless the problem is acute, when an improvement project is likely
to take more than three developer months, you’re usually better off
thinking of it in terms of creating value as part of a larger project.
We’ll discuss this in detail in the next chapter.
Use the 70/20/10 model to apportion non-KTLO work.
How much of its non-KTLO time should a platform team spend on
incremental work versus big architecture projects or entirely new
platforms? We like Google’s 70/20/10 model:
70% on core initiatives (incremental work on current platforms)
20% on adjacent innovation (platform rearchitectures)
10% on transformational innovation (completely new platforms)
However, at any time, teams will differ in how much leverage they
can get from adjacent and transformational innovation. Thus, while
it’s useful to measure and discuss, resist the urge to communicate the
70/20/10 model as a “budget” that leadership grants and teams get to
spend.
Merging roadmaps of platform teams

-- 326 of 630 --

We’ve asked you to make the lists we just described because we believe
that this effort is always valuable for individual platform teams. This level
of detailed analysis gives you more confidence in what you’re doing, helps
you make the case for growing your team when necessary, and lets you
push back against stakeholders who disagree with your proposed
investments. So shouldn’t you get even more value if you try and “roll up”
your roadmap and lists across teams as well?
To start with the easy answer, the most value we have seen in the whole
exercise is one level up. At the skip manager level, the collective “planning
team” is small enough to have conversations about standards and
definitions, and the roadmap can still be represented in a six-page
document, which is short enough that everyone can read and understand it.
This also allows the skip manager to make better decisions about how to
allocate people between teams.
However, we don’t recommend further merging at higher levels in an
attempt to create a complete overall plan, especially for headcount
purposes. After the skip manager level, you begin to lose fidelity in the
information. Worse, involving more people, each with their own agenda,
can make the process political. This is exactly what Ian experienced as a
midlevel manager in AWS’s OP1 process, where the coupling of
management promotions to organization size meant middle managers were
incentivized to show that they should own new “think big” projects and
otherwise grow their organizations. Team managers in turn started padding

-- 327 of 630 --

their estimates to justify the most hiring for their teams, kicking off a race
to the bottom, where even the most principled leaders felt compelled to play
the game to protect their teams.
Further, since hiring is a continuous pipeline that takes time, the VPs and
directors who “owned” the headcount had often changed their plans for
allocating it by the time the new hire offers were made. This was sensible
leadership behavior, but it only increased the cynicism around the
monolithic planning exercise.
Bottom-up planning is important to protect teams from devolving into
operational hell, but don’t try to turn it into “one planning system to rule
them all.” If even AWS can’t use it to get headcount allocation right, it’s
unlikely you will do much better.

-- 328 of 630 --

PLATFORM ANTIPATTERN: RELYING ON INNERSOURCING
Once upon a time, Camille was the owner of a large distributed system that
provided dynamic service discovery. Services registered themselves in her
system, and clients queried it to find the service endpoints. It was built as a
wrapper over a distributed coordination system, Apache ZooKeeper, which
her team also supported. Because client libraries were an important part of
the system and the team didn’t have experts in every language, as a way to
remove bottlenecks, they allowed other developers to build and contribute
their own clients through internal open sourcing, also known as
innersourcing.
One day, the creator of the Perl client library released a bug in his version
that took the entire service down. When they looked into the buggy library,
Camille’s team realized that this creator had started using ZooKeeper
features that were beyond the scope of the discovery service API. This was
a powerful two-for-one lesson: not only did she learn the truth of Hyrum’s
law, but she also learned that it’s risky to innersource code that is part of a
platform ecosystem.
The idea behind innersourcing is that by allowing anyone to contribute to a
codebase, similar to open source software, you create a way for developers
to unblock themselves. Executives like this model because it lets them seem
open to collaboration by saying, “Anyone who is stuck waiting for a feature
is welcome to write the code and contribute it back!” We’re big fans of
open source, and Camille has been an on-again, off-again open source
5

-- 329 of 630 --

contributor for most of her career, so we agree with the power of this model
in theory.
Unfortunately, the reality tends to be much messier. Most people don’t want
to read someone else’s code, figure out how to fix it, or wait for a code
review from some stranger. People are happy to consume open source, but
very few want to contribute to it. Of the few who do want to contribute,
many are only interested in adding some half-considered feature that
tortures the code into doing something it shouldn’t to unblock their niche
use case. Maintainers know that if they approve these changes, they’ll have
to support the feature forever, which makes them understandably cautious,
picky, and slow to accept unproven contributions.
These challenges persist in innersourcing models. You might trust your
colleagues more than you do unknown internet strangers, but ultimately, the
team that owns the software will be responsible for supporting it. So, most
teams prefer hiring more people over reviewing changes from other teams
—and that’s for the best, because few internal teams really want to do the
work of figuring out how to contribute to your platform code.
Platforms add a second wrinkle to this challenge, as Camille learned. Not
only are you taking contributions from others, you are also operating the
system to which they contribute. When someone adds a bug to an open
source project, nobody is paging its maintainers. But the platform team will

-- 330 of 630 --

get paged when something goes wrong with their platform, and it’s
frustrating to have to fight fires ignited by a third-party contribution.
Don’t use innersourcing to avoid hard conversations with your customers
about priorities. Giving your customers the impression that they can just
build what they want and hand it off is naive; setting up a thoughtful model
for contributions that goes beyond the initial code implementation takes a
lot of work.
One such approach is the Amazon “away team” model, which is a contract-
driven model that lets a stuck application team unblock themselves by
developing the platform features they need and giving the code to the
“host” platform team to own long term. We offer a caution: in his time at
Amazon, Ian’s teams used a variant of this model. While the collaboration
worked, the formality of the interaction incurred high management
overhead, even when the engineers got along well. Instead of an informal
agreement within a team that could be flexibly adjusted as necessary, two
managers ended up in formal negotiations over small matters like vacations,
on-call schedules, and code reviews. This is an unsurprising outcome of a
contract-driven interaction model, and one of the reasons we are skeptical
about formal innersourcing processes.
The away team approach may be appropriate in an early-stage platform that
is still evolving, but as it matures, this model should become rarer. If you

-- 331 of 630 --

find your team using it frequently, treat that as a problem that needs action,
not a standard operating model.
Communicating Status with Biweekly
Wins and Challenges
So your team is planning well and delivering incrementally?
Congratulations! But you aren’t out of the woods yet. Even when you plan
flawlessly, things break, surprises happen, and schedules change. If your
senior stakeholders aren’t paying too much attention but don’t see their
expected improvements, they may assume that nothing is happening. And
as the organization grows, it’s hard for the leaders to keep track of
everything that’s happening across the different teams and feel confident
that things are going in the right direction.
To solve for this, we use an exercise called Wins and Challenges. It’s a way
of gathering biweekly updates, tailoring them to be meaningful to
stakeholders, and creating value for the team itself by highlighting their
accomplishments, alerting their leaders to problems, and recording their
progress for posterity. While this section is not specific to platform
engineering, Wins and Challenges is a particularly valuable habit for
platform engineering teams, whose long-term focus often makes them
appear to accomplish very little from day to day. We’ve used Wins and

-- 332 of 630 --

Challenges at companies big and small to show our bosses, peers, and
stakeholders what our teams have been up to and to make sure our
managers are paying the right attention to the work and its impact.
The Basics
Every two weeks, we walk up the organizational tree, writing a short
number of bullet points that describe major accomplishments (“wins”) and
issues (“challenges”) over the prior two weeks. By “walk up,” we mean that
the line managers write the updates for their teams, and then each level
above in the hierarchy is tasked with selecting the most important,
interesting, and/or impactful points from the level below to share, rewriting
them as necessary to be consumed by a broader audience.
Before we go into how to run this exercise and write these updates, let’s
start with clarifying why it’s worth your time.
Why: What’s the Value?
For the team and its management, this exercise provides a lightweight,
regularly scheduled way for everyone to receive an appropriate amount of
information about what other teams are doing. It creates a record, team by
team, of what really happened over the quarter, which is useful for writing
business and performance reviews. And it forces managers to account for

-- 333 of 630 --

what really happened in the last two weeks, which is something sprints and
other types of ceremonies often fail to do.
For stakeholders, this exercise provides transparency into the work at
regular intervals. Platform engineering teams, because they are often
working on long-term, less readily understandable projects, need to spend
even more time than most teams on communicating the value and impact of
their work. The goal is to help the overall organization see that this isn’t just
a team of engineers playing around with fun engineering stuff; it’s a team
tackling hard problems that make a difference to the company. Establishing
understanding and trust is crucial, and for both of us, across multiple
companies, this exercise has been a keystone of that process.
If you think this sounds like busywork but you don’t do any other regular
reporting, we encourage you to try it. Platform leaders often mistakenly
believe that they don’t need to provide transparency regularly, or that their
teams’ work is so big that it’s impossible to summarize. And, kindly, we
say: hogwash. You owe it to your peers and boss and customers to create
transparency into your work, and you owe it to your team to think about
how the work can be broken down and delivered more frequently.
If this exercise duplicates things you already do to showcase your team’s
impact, you might not need it. However, we encourage you to think about
whether Wins and Challenges can enhance what you’re already doing.
Many reporting exercises are largely about output measures, like how many

-- 334 of 630 --

tickets the team closed or how many story points they completed. This is
fine, but it doesn’t incorporate regular reflection on the outcomes of that
work. It may be worthwhile to add this as a final step to that output
reporting: we got all this stuff done, sure, but what was its impact?
What: Structuring Wins and Challenges Updates
The basic format looks like this:
Wins:
Point 1
Point 2
Point 3
Point 4
Challenges:
Challenge 1
Challenge 2
There are two parts to the “what” of this exercise. The first is getting people
to write good updates in the first place. In our experience, the structure is
one of the biggest initial sticking points. One of Camille’s senior product

-- 335 of 630 --

managers created a useful three-part formula for structuring Wins and
Challenges updates —to write an update, start with a short, bolded
summary, then break it down into a sentence or two describing the situation,
action, and result:
Situation
What was the situation before the action took place? This gives the
audience the necessary context to appreciate why you acted.
Action
What did you do to address the situation? This explains to your
audience the size and shape of the problem, as well as the actual
work undertaken.
Result
How did your actions affect the situation? The best is when you can
use numbers to show a measurable change.
The goal is to write something your audience can scan and understand,
quickly and easily. Depending on the audience, you may need to expand
acronyms, reduce complex system concepts into simpler components, or
remove unnecessary details.
Numbers are your friends. Metrics help people understand the size of the
problem and the impact of the work. Not everything can or should be
6

-- 336 of 630 --

quantified, but in business communication it’s helpful to quantify outcomes
whenever possible.
Some examples of topics to include in your updates are:
News about major initiatives, such as achieving milestones or running
into delays
News about people, like someone leaving or joining the team, team
splits, and reorganizations
Operations news, such as reporting on incidents, celebrating a good
week (in terms of incidents or pages), or acknowledging a bad one
Changes in product or engineering metrics, such as performance
improvements, cost savings, adoption milestones, customer satisfaction
survey changes, or notable customer feedback
Don’t Forget the Challenges!
We probably don’t need to convince you to share your wins, but it’s worth
taking a moment to think about the challenges. Why include challenges at
all? Which challenges are worth including?
Sharing your challenges serves two important purposes:
Internal health monitoring

-- 337 of 630 --

Within the platform organization, challenges give management
visibility into where the platform teams are having issues with
collaboration, stability, or delivery—even if those issues haven’t
blown up enough to grab the attention of more senior management.
Challenges serve as conversation-starters among the management
team and can generate better collaboration within the organization.
Challenges may also highlight problems between platform teams and
other external teams: for example, if the platform team is still waiting
for a customer team to provide feedback on a new feature, or when
the wait for a security review is blocking a release. These can be
used to support escalations or to document repeated problems with
an external team.
External trust building
Companies don’t often have a place to share what isn’t going well,
but especially for central teams, transparency is part of building trust.
Sharing challenges provides an opportunity for others to step in and
help. Sometimes, when a team calls out a challenge, senior managers
can see an unresolved priority conflict that they need to look into. At
much larger companies, you might not even hear about challenges
elsewhere in the company that affect your engineering teams until
they show up in an update.

-- 338 of 630 --

The challenges you choose to share externally should be a
meaningful subset chosen because they are useful for building trust,
getting help, or highlighting ongoing issues. Things break, and while
you may have an excellent incident management and postmortem
process, briefly acknowledging bigger incidents can help others trust
that your team is on top of things. The Challenges section is also a
good place to acknowledge unforeseen shipping delays, vendor
negotiation issues, security incidents, or even the loss of key
personnel.
It’s important to note that you don’t want to share collaboration challenges
thoughtlessly. If you publish an issue with a partner team that no one has
brought to the leadership of that team, they may see it as you calling them
out publicly before giving them a chance to respond.
Getting Your Team to Write Wins and Challenges
Having rolled out this process several times now, it is always an iterative
exercise. Teaching your team how to write good wins and challenges is the
first obstacle, and while this section may help, it’s a skill that you will all
build over time. Just getting team members to write them in the first place
can be a struggle. We’ve learned that the best way to roll this out is to pull
off the bandage: just mandate it. In 6 to 12 months, review the outcomes to
decide how it’s going, and adjust as necessary.

-- 339 of 630 --

It’s important to be clear about who is expected to participate, the format
you need, and when it must be done. If you waffle or express uncertainty as
to whether this is a real thing or just an optional exercise, you’ll lose your
teams’ attention and focus.
Set a day and time by which all updates need to come in (for example,
every Wednesday by 3 p.m. EST). Set the expectation of who will provide
the updates (we’ll give some advice momentarily). Put out a template and
show them where to save their updates. The more specific you can be about
the process, the easier it will be for people to focus on the actual updates.
Some teams may complain about reporting at a time that doesn’t match
their current sprint cadence. But having to adjust your sprints by a week is
not a major hardship, and the value this process creates is worth the
inconvenience. Some teams may not run on a biweekly cadence; others
might not have major updates for a while (you may see this during
holidays). That’s all OK! Cadence conflict isn’t a good reason not to roll
this out.
Who should write the updates?
The person accountable for execution and delivery on the teams should be
the one responsible for making sure updates are written and for sharing the
most impactful updates more broadly. Most of the time, we think, this
should be engineering managers. Line managers should gather updates from
the engineers on their teams and share them with directors, who will

-- 340 of 630 --

aggregate them and share them with the VP (by which we mean someone
managing an organization of 100+ engineers), who selects highlights to
share with their peers and boss. Product management team members and
managers may play a role in drafting and editing updates, but engineering
managers are responsible for making sure the final product represents their
teams’ most important work and challenges.
When the team is small, it is tempting for the most senior manager to do all
of the aggregation and editing themselves. Reading the list of possible
updates is an incredible window into what’s going on with the team, and as
you ask questions and edit the updates, you teach your team what is
valuable to communicate and how to present the information. But like every
process that depends on one key person, your process will eventually break
if you are the only person who is allowed to do it. So, do it yourself if it
makes sense, but when you’re on vacation, give the responsibility to
someone else. As your team grows, look for more opportunities to involve
others in the final product.
Who should receive the updates?
Within the platform team, skip managers should review the Wins and
Challenges across their managers. The VP should make sure that the
highlights from each skip manager are visible to all skip managers, and may
review them in staff meetings as applicable.

-- 341 of 630 --

More importantly, the VP sends the high-level highlights to their peers,
stakeholders, and boss, usually by email. Writing Wins and Challenges for
platform team use only goes so far; if you want to get real value, share them
outside the organization. Teams should view showing up in the Wins as a
mark of honor; this encourages the kind of impact-focused culture that we
all want to develop in our organizations. Publishing these Wins and
Challenges broadly makes it clear to everyone that the platform team is
working on important projects, delivering incrementally against its goals,
and providing leverage to the business.
Wrapping Up
If you’re feeling a bit daunted after reading this chapter, we don’t blame
you. There’s a lot of detail implicit in what we have suggested here. It’s
hard to get teams to write good project proposals, design docs, and action
plans. Many managers get very stressed when trying to estimate the cost of
operating their platform, and they may not have confidence that they have
enough delivery to communicate on a biweekly cadence.
We don’t suggest that you tackle all of this at once. Pick the options that
seem most relevant. It’s easier to start a Wins and Challenges
communication process when your team is in execution mode, rather than
in the middle of planning.

-- 342 of 630 --

If you manage a single area or team, think about how you might estimate
your team’s baseline “required” work—your KTLO work. The easiest way
is to observe what is happening. In any given week or month, how much of
the available engineering time is spent on KTLO and how much on moving
the product forward, designing something new, or doing research? You
don’t have to be perfectly accurate down to the hour; the goal is to quantify
the capacity you have for investment so that, at planning time, you have a
better sense of the team’s ability to take on new things.
Teaching teams to write good documentation takes time. This is an exercise
that the staff engineers can and should own, with managers assisting with
the work estimations. Those same staff engineers (or perhaps SREs) are the
right people to evaluate the state of things in support of incremental
changes and advise on what, if anything, might be worth doing to move that
forward.
Some pieces of work are easy to break down and important enough to
prioritize, no matter what time of year it is. Leave some slack in your
schedule for this work. For the big initiatives, get into the habit of going
through the design documentation process. This has a way of separating the
wheat from the chaff: it helps you distinguish the serious ideas with a high
chance of success from the shiny but low-value ideas that aren’t worth the
effort of writing up a plan. In the rare case where you find yourself with
more high-quality proposals than your current capacity can handle, you can

-- 343 of 630 --

use this to justify a request for growth—or, better yet, look for synergies
between proposals and see how you might address common needs.
Finally, don’t forget to provide transparency to your important stakeholders
about what your team is delivering. Combining these planning practices
with agile delivery and striving to produce incremental value at all times is
a mindset shift that separates good platform teams from exceptional ones.
This is hard work, but to gain recognition and reward for your efforts your
stakeholders need to know about the great work that you’re doing, which
ultimately helps you earn the trust and respect of the organization.
For more ideas, we recommend Tanya Reilly’s The Staff Engineer’s Path (O’Reilly), particularly
Chapter 5, “Leading Big Projects.”
We will note that our experience is that design documents should be started before implementation
begins but are usually not finished and reviewed until a few months into implementation, when
important trade-offs are better understood.
John Gall, General Systemantics (Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Company), 71.
See Brendan Gregg, Systems Performance, 2nd ed. (Addison-Wesley).
Paraphrased, all observable behaviors of your system will be depended on by somebody, no matter
what you promise in the contract.
Adapted from an interview technique called STAR, for situation, task, action, result.
1
2
3
4
5
6

-- 344 of 630 --

Chapter 8. Rearchitecting Platforms
If you don’t end up regretting your early technology decisions, you
probably overengineered.
—Randy Schoup
In Chapter 5, we described a process for delivering new platforms: start
small, partner with a few select customers, and make sure you’re building
something that has broad utility for your customer base through incremental
delivery. In Chapter 7, we outlined our practices for roadmap planning
beyond your product roadmap, helping you balance investments in KTLO
work and new features with system improvements to enhance operational
efficiency, scalability, security, and more. This all sounds great: you start
small, gain momentum, and keep things moving smoothly by regular
investment in system maintenance as well as features. What could go
wrong?
Even when following this process perfectly, you can still hit a wall. As the
system load increases, it begins to experience more operational issues,
despite your incremental system investments. The KTLO work grows as the
load increases, which in turn lowers the team’s capacity to deliver either
system improvements or new features. Eventually, the best software
developers leave—not because of burnout, but because of frustration over
the lack of progress. Crucial infrastructure becomes frozen in time,

-- 345 of 630 --

remaining critical for the business but no longer able to support new
capabilities.
Why don’t incremental system improvements prevent this situation? The
issue is that while these improvements have the highest short-term benefits
for scaling the system, their narrow focus means they struggle to address
deeper shortcomings in the system’s architecture.
The word “architecture” can sometimes evoke negative connotations:
endless meetings debating irrelevant details that are impractical to
implement and disconnected from the day-to-day of building and operating
systems. Even so, we all know that some system architectures handle scale
better than others—whether it’s scaling for operational load, feature breadth,
users, or the number of people working on the system. With continual
growth in any of these areas, a system’s architecture will eventually become
the bottleneck.
This is why we embrace an approach we call rearchitecture, which is an
iterative process of reimplementing a system’s architecture while it remains
live and continues to serve load. This differs from a v2 approach, where a
new system with a different architecture and feature set is created to replace
the original, requiring customers to migrate from v1 to v2.
We’ll start this chapter by making the case for why rearchitecture is a better
approach than building a v2. Then we’ll talk about a growing focus of
platform architecture: how to improve the security profile of your

-- 346 of 630 --

applications. Next, we’ll explore the first step of succeeding with
rearchitectures, looking at the technical aspects of establishing guardrails
that allow larger system changes to succeed. We’ll finish with the
management aspects of rearchitectures—how to plan for something that
shows incremental value throughout its multiyear delivery.
Rearchitectures might seem like a sign that you failed to build the right
thing, but we prefer to see them as evidence that you have a successful
platform supporting a growing business, and now you have the opportunity
to evolve in the face of this success. With that, let’s dive in.
Why Rearchitecting Is Preferred to
Building a v2
You have a platform that’s underarchitected for the scale it needs to handle.
Are you better off creating a newly architected system from scratch with a
“greenfield” approach, or rearchitecting the current system with a “changing
the plane’s engine as it’s flying” approach? It may seem like it should be
easier to build the right thing from scratch than to make complex changes to
a system that’s already handling critical load. However, we believe that
rearchitecting is ultimately the right approach, due to the challenges of
designing and delivering a v2 within your typical platform engineering team
culture.

-- 347 of 630 --

Let’s start with the well-known phenomenon of the second-system effect,
first observed in 1964. A team that has only ever built one version of a
system tends to assume that they can correct for every deficiency the second
time around. Their v2 design grows and grows in reaction to all the flaws
they perceive in the v1. Management responds to the expanded scope by
adding more people to the team, which just adds to the project’s complexity
and slows down delivery. Ultimately, these systems often fail to ship and get
canceled. For those that do ship, they may find their users have moved on or
found workarounds and no longer need or want the new offering.
We believe the second-system effect is real, but there’s more to it than the
engineering hubris that comes from having only one success under your
belt. After all, there are plenty of hubristic engineers working on all stages
of systems, not just v2s!
Rather, we believe that by coupling the problem of defining a new product
with the problem of building a scaled architecture to support complex
business demands, we’re asking the engineering team to successfully hold
three different mindsets at once:
The mindset that iterates to create a useful product out of nothing but an
ambiguous need, building a scrappy architecture that puts aside longer
term needs to deliver quickly (pioneers)
The mindset that builds an architecture to handle rapid scaling of load
and business criticality (settlers)
1
2

-- 348 of 630 --

The mindset that builds a robust, cost-efficient architecture to handle a
diverse and conflicting set of requirements that are all critical to the
business (town planners)
In the next sections we describe these mindsets further and show how they
are each equipped to handle different architectural needs of a platform at
different levels of scale and maturity. We will argue why a rearchitecture
approach is the most optimal way to eventually get to platforms that deliver
a lot of business value, with an architecture that supports the scale of
delivery.
Different Engineering Mindsets
The idea that there are different “right” styles of engineering is not a novel
idea. One model was proposed by Simon Wardley, who describes three
engineer types working on the same successful technical business as it
evolves over its lifetime of growth: pioneers, settlers, and town planners.
Each is motivated differently in the face of a problem with ambiguous value
and requirements, which means they make different trade-offs in the
robustness of what is built. According to Wardley’s blog post “On Pioneers,
Settlers, Town Planners and Theft”:

-- 349 of 630 --

Pioneers are brilliant people. They are able to explore never before
discovered concepts, the uncharted land. They show you wonder but
they fail a lot. Half the time the thing doesn’t work properly. You
wouldn’t trust what they build. They create “crazy” ideas.…
Settlers are brilliant people. They can turn the half baked thing into
something useful for a larger audience. They build trust. They build
understanding. They make the possible future actually happen. They
turn the prototype into a product, make it manufacturable, listen to
customers and turn it profitable. Their innovation is what we tend to
think of as applied research and differentiation.…
Town Planners are brilliant people. They are able to take something
and industrialise it taking advantage of economies of scale. This
requires immense skill. You trust what they build. They find ways to
make things faster, better, smaller, more efficient, more economic and
good enough.
Wardley categorizes them as different types of people, but since this falls
along a spectrum, and we think people can (somewhat) change, we prefer to
call them “mindsets.” However, we concur with his view that it’s hard for an
individual to adopt multiple mindsets at once, and we think this is even
more true for teams. That’s because the mindsets focus on very different
aspects of a problem, resulting in vastly different ideas of what “right” looks
like. From the same blog post:

-- 350 of 630 --

Each group innovates but innovation is not the same for each group
i.e. the innovation of an entirely new activity is different to the feature
differentiation of a product which is different from converting a
product to a utility service. Unfortunately, despite being different
forms of innovation that won’t stop people pretending there’s only one
and it’s all the same. Try not to do this.
Each group has different attitudes though aptitudes (e.g. broad skill
description such as finance, engineering or marketing) might be the
same. Engineering in the pioneering group is not the same as
engineering in the town planners.
So, teams of different mindsets will waste a lot of time debating things at the
technical and process levels that cannot be resolved without first agreeing
on which mindset they should collectively be operating under (and
accepting there might be some people on the team who are unable to be
productive with that mindset).
Wardely’s work describes all of this in the context of business products, but
we think it directly maps to platforms and how they are architected.
Architectural Needs Drive Mindset Demands
A way of thinking about system architecture is as the fundamental design
decisions that will forever constrain the system’s capabilities, even as

-- 351 of 630 --

individual components of the system are improved. In the previous chapter,
we introduced three categories of a system’s operational capabilities:
efficiency, reliability, and security. A system’s architecture will make some
types of improvements in these areas, if not impossible, at least
prohibitively expensive. A classic example is using a relational database to
store large “blobs” as if it was S3. While you can scale it up vertically as
your data volume and throughput increase, it’s expensive. Eventually even
that scaling can become impossible, and the architecture will have to
change.
Beyond efficiency, reliability, and security, there is a fourth category of
system capability that can force a rearchitecture: features. Some feature
requests are so substantial, the only way to implement them is with a
different architecture. A classic example is when you offer a key/value store,
but your customers need it to provide transactional SQL write semantics.
This feature request challenges the original system architecture assumptions
so much that the only way to tackle it is through a different architecture.
In Table 8-1, we show how the requirements in these four categories
typically change as a platform scales and matures, meaning it needs to
handle more load, more features, and increasing system requirements. To do
this, we nominate three points of system maturity that directly relate to the
three engineering mindsets we just discussed. In the following section, we
will argue why this leads to a rearchitecture approach.

-- 352 of 630 --

Table 8-1. Model of architectural maturity, mapping changing requirements to different types of
engineering mindsets
Scrappy
platform
Scalable
platform Robust platform
Business needs
Feature
delivery
“Agile.”
Frequent
revision as
ambiguity in
customer
needs is
resolved and
the values of
features are
better defined.
Balancing big
customers
becoming
timeline- and
quality-driven,
versus smaller
applications
wanting agility.
New and small
customers want
agility, but are
told to wait
behind large
customers who
want certainty
that things they
require will be
done on time.

-- 353 of 630 --

Scrappy
platform
Scalable
platform Robust platform
Reliability 	Low. Usually
applications
themselves are
young,
meaning users
have higher
tolerance for
outages.
Operational rigor.
Established
applications now
have higher
requirements.
New onboarders
have lower
requirements,
which creates
tension as they
want the platform
to move faster on
features.
Metric-driven.
Usually a three
nines baseline,
five nines
desired.
Measured on a
per-customer
basis, at least for
the big
customers.

-- 354 of 630 --

Scrappy
platform
Scalable
platform Robust platform
Security 	Low. Usually
applications
are assumed to
“do the right
thing.”
Paved paths limit
impact of
mistakes by
application
engineers.
Secure by design.
Assumes there
will be
compromises, so
engineers/systems
cannot be trusted
with ad hoc
access to
production data.
Efficiency 	Usually an
afterthought
given the
system’s lack
of scale
Optimizing
performance for
dominant loads
Optimizing
system-wide
efficiency with a
focus on dollars
saved
Leads to

-- 355 of 630 --

Scrappy
platform
Scalable
platform Robust platform
Focus of
platform team
Customer
collaboration
around feature
delivery to
enable growth
Investment in
scalability to keep
up with growth
Forward planning
to simultaneously
maximize
security,
reliability,
efficiency, and
on-time delivery
Optimal
mindset
Pioneer 	Settler 	Town planner
Why It Is Hard to Build v2 Platforms, but Possible
to Rearchitect
With this model defined, we can better understand the challenges for
delivering a v2. There are two core issues:
A v2 brings with it many changes beyond the underlying architecture, as
the team tries to correct for past sins in the design while also adding
significant new functionality. This makes it a fundamentally high-risk
operation, no matter how agile and brilliant your engineers and product
managers are.

-- 356 of 630 --

The platform organization is operating mostly scalable and robust
systems, and the culture of their teams is likely to be aligned to the settler
or town planner mindset. This is in direct conflict with the mindset
needed to build a greenfield product with ambiguous requirements in an
agile “move fast and break things” manner.
Rearchitectures, while still extremely challenging, do not have these specific
issues:
A rearchitecture has natural limits to the change it can offer, particularly
if the rearchitected system is incrementally delivered within the logical
construct of the existing platform. By limiting the amount of customer-
visible change we make during a rearchitecture, we constrain ourselves to
fixing the system architecture without adding on a bunch of bells and
whistles; by doing it within the platform, we force ourselves to think
carefully about the change approach itself to minimize the risk and
impact to customers.
There are plenty of customer considerations to successfully delivering a
rearchitecture, but they aren’t the kinds of concerns that require a strong
pioneer mindset. The work lends itself well to settlers especially, as it
requires a balance of rigor and agility to pull off in a reasonable time
frame.
This is why we recommend a rearchitecture approach, shifting the mindset
of the team as the architectural capabilities need to be rebuilt for more scale

-- 357 of 630 --

and robustness, as shown in Figure 8-1.
Figure 8-1. How a platform is successfully rearchitected over time

-- 358 of 630 --

GETTING PIONEER AGILITY ON ROBUST PLATFORMS
You might be wondering, “What about partnering with pioneers on customer
teams, like you suggested in Chapter 5?” After all, even if you buy the
model of mindsets and architectural maturity, it still doesn’t help you with
sudden technology shifts that force major platform capability expansion.
When you have robust platforms owned by teams of town planners, there
will still be times when the business discovers a major new feature need that
should be provided by the platform organization. Examples here include
moving from data centers to the public cloud, or embracing generative AI

-- 359 of 630 --

capabilities. It could be tied to market opportunities as well; for example,
standing up a full application stack on a new cloud provider.
In any case, you need to move quickly, and you not only have complex
foundational platforms that make it hard, but also have a team whose
mindset is not aligned with fast iteration. Is the only solution to allow the
application teams to build shadow platforms? That seems very costly if you
are doing it across a suite of existing platforms.
A better approach is allowing the pioneers to start building shadow platform
capabilities, but be clear that their best ideas, once established, will get
integrated into existing platforms. This sounds like a free lunch, but
avoiding the “two platforms” outcome requires a great deal of work by the
platform leaders—managers, product managers, and staff engineers. That’s
because both the pioneers and their early customers will get attached to the
early capabilities of their new systems (especially speed of iteration). When
you decide to integrate, you can end up making everyone unhappy in the
short term—customers, the pioneer engineers, and even the existing
platform’s engineers, who often get stuck with integrating the “mess” the
pioneers built.
We experienced this firsthand when we worked for a platform organization
that was years away from fully supporting the public cloud, with application
teams starting to demand the elastic compute capabilities that only the
public cloud could offer. We staffed a small “Public Cloud Platform” team

-- 360 of 630 --

with pioneers and asked them to embed within the application teams that
had specific cloud demands. We tasked them with integrating those
application teams into the existing platforms, but stressed that moving fast
was more important than doing it right, so some mess was fine.
The pioneers did exactly as asked: they got the application teams onto the
cloud quickly, but they also made a mess. This was less about the quality of
their code, and more that they didn’t put a lot of thought into how they
would eventually integrate wider use cases into existing platforms, including
overstepping boundaries of existing platform capabilities with “similar but
different” functionality. As leaders, we were responsible for easing the
tension between this pioneering team and the existing platform teams by
communicating a plan to integrate the two eventually, even though the
timeline was unclear.
After about 18 months of delivery from the pioneer team, we had to follow
through on that plan. The pioneers were now turning their duplicate
capabilities into full duplicate platforms. They argued that these new
platforms were better, but they had no chance of supporting existing use
cases without massive migrations. So, we transitioned the new systems into
the existing platforms, emphasizing that it was the platform teams’ job to
integrate, and then scale up. We offered the pioneers a chance to move with
their systems, but were not surprised when most instead found new green
fields. Yes, there was some grumbling on both sides, but by showing that we

-- 361 of 630 --

recognized and appreciated the abilities and contributions on both sides, in
the end we achieved a smooth transition.
Addressing Security with Architecture
Earlier in this chapter, we listed four major capabilities to think about in a
rearchitecture: reliability, features, efficiency, and security. These are all
hard, but security is the hardest. It’s a deep enough field on its own to have
specialists: security engineers. But the collaboration between security
engineers and platform teams is challenging, especially when it comes to
how their architectures and product choices enable a better overall risk
posture. This is a massive loss because, as the world gets more threatened
by the oversights that lead to big breaches, platforms that offer “security out
of the box” to all application teams could create enormous value for
business.
With that in mind, we asked Kelly Shortridge, author of Security Chaos
Engineering (O’Reilly), to summarize what she would most emphasize in
building security resilience into platforms. What follows is from Kelly.

-- 362 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 363 of 630 --

While we cannot prevent cybercriminals from attacking, there are ways we
can outsmart them and diminish their harm. We can architect our platforms
to prepare our software systems for intrusion, applying the same platform
engineering principles we use to sustain reliability, efficiency, and feature
delivery to outmaneuver attackers and create better security outcomes.
In my book, I call this a resilience approach, meaning security initiatives
align with organizational objectives like sustaining growth, satisfying
customers, and innovating. Resilience is the ability for a system to adapt its
functioning in response to changing conditions, so it can continue operating
successfully. Instead of attempting to prevent failure, try to minimize the
impact of failure. Rather than imposing awareness training, invest in your
ability to change on demand—that is, invest in adaptive capacity—so you
can stay nimble like attackers and outmaneuver them (with the added
benefit of outmaneuvering your market competition, too).
The best security strategies share the same goal: to ensure the business can
succeed and achieve its goals despite the presence of cyberattackers. These
strategies do not insist that application engineers must contort and become
“security aware.” Instead, the best security strategies treat system design as
their highest leverage point, trying to infuse security into the platform’s
features and architecture until it slips into invisibility.
A modern approach to cybersecurity therefore involves designing, building,
and operating platforms that enable adaptation, enforce secure

-- 364 of 630 --

configurations, and make the safer way the faster and easier way. This
approach should be owned by a team that can develop and deliver software,
maintain platforms at scale, and understand system context—all things at
which platform engineering teams excel. Adopt the mindset that security is a
major facet of platform maturity and invest in building patterns, tools, and
frameworks that cultivate resilience capabilities.
Don’t try to revolutionize your platforms overnight to be “secure.” Instead,
iteratively rearchitect them, selecting the security opportunities that best
align with your priorities, constraints, and context.
Let’s dig into what we mean by rearchitecting a system to sustain resilience.
PLATFORM ARCHITECTURE TO REDUCE SECURITY HAZARDS
As a platform team, resilience helps you sustain security outcomes (and
their underlying properties) over time. How can architecture help you
gracefully adapt to attacks (or other failures) and conserve your application
engineers’ cognitive capacity for healthier activities than hypervigilance?
Careful platform design can mean that, when an adverse scenario erupts, the
system doesn’t require human interaction to continue fulfilling its duty. This
outcome is what the cybersecurity industry refers to as “security by design.”
Like birds sewing strands of spider silk into their nests, you can weave
security capabilities into your platform architecture to enrich its flexibility
and resilience—allowing you to preserve your customer applications’
success against hazards, and stretch to nurture fresh growth. These security

-- 365 of 630 --

capabilities are not the ones that come to mind first, like a firewall or
antivirus agent. Rather, you want to imitate the songbirds who select
resilient, flexible patterns and materials for nests that can withstand
turbulence without active intervention.
To invest in security by design, you can rearchitect your systems to
eliminate or reduce hazards—potential sources of harm that include the
characteristics of your technology as well as human actions or inactions.
Design-based security solutions feature two key traits:
They do not depend on human behavior.
They provide substantial separation of the user from the hazard.
When you eliminate hazards, you excise things or activities that can produce
harm—for example, rewriting a component into a memory-safe language.
When you reduce hazards, you curtail what can cause harm, even if you
don’t entirely eliminate all the hazardous things or activities—for example,
standardizing an authentication component.
Through the lens of resilience and eliminating hazards, you can reduce the
application team’s choices to those that:
Minimize the potential impact of failure
Minimize the degree of human intervention required to circumnavigate
hazards

-- 366 of 630 --

Preserve possibilities for growth and innovation
Most of the security solutions within that nexus also offer benefits across the
other architecture capabilities: feature delivery, reliability, and efficiency.
Let’s consider a few examples of patterns created by platform engineering
teams that not only help sustain resilience against attack, but nourish other
dimensions of success:
Automated testing tools let application development teams focus on their
application’s behavior—and validating that behavior—so they are not
mired in tool selection and customization; if devs don’t fiddle with their
tools, they can dedicate time to writing tests that improve security
outcomes (integration tests, in particular, can catch the interactions
between components that attackers love to exploit).
Standardized deployment tooling, especially infrastructure as code, lets
application teams focus on building software rather than the challenges
of deploying it. A special focus is cleanup; when IaC automatically
removes outdated infrastructure, you eliminate the drift, data exposure,
and attack paths wrought by stale systems.
Configuration management patterns let application teams focus on
building software rather than managing configurations between
environments. These patterns also simplify instantiation and destruction
of environments, vanquish data sharing between stages of the
development workflow, and temper engineers’ tendency to pull
production data into systems with widespread access.

-- 367 of 630 --

Token and secrets management systems allow application teams to build
systems without worry for how they will safely handle access keys; they
also avoid application teams building systems that mishandle the “fissile
material” that is secret keys and access tokens.
Standardized observability tooling (especially distributed tracing) allows
incident responders to trace operations as they flow between systems,
imparting a holistic perspective critical for understanding the behavior of
complex systems. More vantage points mean more opportunities to spot
unwanted activity before it festers or cascades, and standardization
minimizes the toil of data plumbing, the potential for mistakes, and the
propensity for silos.
Standard service and web frameworks let engineers focus on delivering
business value without the stress of figuring out how to safely package
and shuttle data to end users; with appropriate choices, application
engineers won’t have to think about cross-site request forgery (XSRF),
cross-site scripting (CSS), cross-origin resource sharing (CORS), or
cookie management.
Common authentication/authorization middleware lets application
engineers “plug and play” components and assume that their service will
properly validate traffic; the alternative is a DIY approach that foments
disaster at scale when teams introduce inconsistencies between how
services validate access.
Compute platforms with declarative access control let application teams
focus on building services and declaring how they should communicate

-- 368 of 630 --

with specific peers, rather than managing network and computing
infrastructure themselves; this prevents departments from creating
“infrastructure islands” where all teams share access, avoiding the overly
permissive access that attackers could exploit.
Tenant-isolated architectures simplify implementation and performance
concerns for engineers, letting them build features without fretting about
limiting all operations to the tenant that is accessing the service. Even in
the presence of most security failures, this isolation removes attackers’
ability to gain access to another tenant’s data.
These kinds of patterns help you invest in speedy, safe change—exactly
what you need to outmaneuver attackers. But how do you identify which
opportunities to pursue first in your organization? And how do you
implement these patterns in practice?
USE PAVED PATHS TO MAKE APPLICATIONS SECURE BY DEFAULT
We want to make the resilient way the path of least resistance—not just
secure by design, but by default. When you implement resilience by default,
it means developers must opt out of the safe option. You “nudge” them
toward your desired outcome but allow room for exceptions. To provide a
physical-world example, newer cars lock by default when you walk away
with the keys. Your software equivalent might take the form of default
service templates using infrastructure as code: you can use automation to
demolish unused infrastructure and remove it as an attack path.

-- 369 of 630 --

A popular name for these “least-resistant” paths is paved paths: well-
integrated, supported solutions to common problems that allow humans to
focus on their distinct value creation. By blessing certain options by default
—and, importantly, making the resilient way the easier way—you endorse
standardization and reduce choice overload. You construct a more resilient
default for the organization, even when some teams opt out.
How do you prioritize candidates for architecting security into your
platforms? Much like you desire in the context of reliability, you want to
offload as much security “toil” from your customers as you can. When
helping organizations prioritize what patterns, tools, and paved paths to
build, I encourage them to ask questions like:
What security checks or tasks fall on application teams to complete at
each stage of software delivery?
What security mechanisms are standard requirements in software?
Are there security checklists application engineering teams must
complete before deployment?
What security incidents or near-misses have been blamed on “human
error” recently?
As inspiration for your next strategy brainstorm, here are some high-level
categories of paved paths I’ve seen organizations create to successfully
solve cybersecurity problems for application teams while improving
reliability, efficiency, or feature delivery at the same time:

-- 370 of 630 --

API protection—XSRF protection, security header validation, rate
limiting, tarpitting and throttling, IP geofencing, distributed denial of
service (DDoS) protection, and web application firewall (WAF)
integration
Authentication and authorization
Caching compliance and static asset caching
Certificate management and secure network protocols
Static and dynamic analysis tooling
Automated testing frameworks—fuzzing, penetration tests, resilience
stress tests (i.e., chaos experiments), smoke tests
Application engineering’s security fate relies on the platforms underlying
their code. Platform engineering teams can achieve substantial leverage by
designing platforms with resilience in mind. If you invest in opportunities
that minimize the potential impact of attacks (or other failures), minimize
the human heroism required to reduce hazards, and enable nimble changes
to preserve possibilities, you can shepherd your organization’s ongoing
success despite the ongoing danger of attackers.
Guardrails for Rearchitectures
For rearchitecting to succeed, you need to minimize the disruption for
existing users—ideally so they don’t even notice the change. This is a

-- 371 of 630 --

challenge; scrappy platforms are not built with major changes to their
underlying architecture in mind, and if you try to make big changes without
thinking through the user impact, you can burn a lot of goodwill with those
existing customers. Now is the time to think about the guardrails you need
to implement in order to lower the cost of change for both your team and its
users.
Compatibility
Backward compatibility breaks can kill, and they are exceptionally deadly
for multitenant platforms. Ideally, you’ll never make a backward-breaking
change to your API, but when it is unavoidable, treat it as a major version
upgrade to a new API. Instead of making a backward-breaking change in
one go, introduce the change as a new API, and give your users a long lead
time to migrate to the new API before turning off and eventually deleting
the old one.
Think about how many versions of the system you want to have live in
production at any time. Having many versions supported at once means you
can release new versions more quickly, but it also means that the space of
compatibility you have to think about with every release grows. If you know
that you will never have more than one prior version’s compatibility to
worry about, you can reason much more clearly about the new code you’re
writing.

-- 372 of 630 --

Testing
These days, developers like to brag about testing in production using
capabilities like feature flagging or shadow deployments. But when you are
releasing foundational infrastructure platforms that people rely on to run
core business applications, it is not acceptable to trade delivery speed for
even slight perturbations in quality or performance. To support frequent,
safe releases, you need to invest in robust testing processes.
For internal platforms, you may have the ability to run full integration test
environments with your own users’ dependent tests executed as part of the
test suite. In companies with large monorepos, this is a common tactic to
catch user code breaks early in the development cycle. Even without a
monorepo, having a thorough integration testing suite with user-submitted
tests is a good strategy for catching some of the integration problems early.
Adoption of modern testing methods such as property-based testing and
fuzzing is another powerful approach to identifying failure that doesn’t
require a fully provisioned simulation environment.
Finally, in Chapter 6, we covered the importance of deep synthetic
monitoring. Indeed, when Ian was at AWS, his teams invested so much in
synthetic monitoring that it often supplanted functional integration testing—
why wouldn’t you want the same thing testing your new builds against their
complex dependencies in the production environment? But this is not the
same thing as YOLO production testing (“we’ll just roll it back quickly if
3

-- 373 of 630 --

we see it break”). If you want to go down this route, you need solid
shadow/canary deployments and the ability to ensure that only synthetic
monitoring gets scheduled to the new deployment until it passes monitor
testing.
Lower Environments
Assuming you have a separate non-production environment for supporting
your customers’ pre-production testing, you can also use this environment
as part of your validation strategy. Once you have vetted changes with your
own testing, using this environment for a final pre-release test will give you
thorough integration testing as customers run their applications’ pre-release
vetting on top of your release candidates.
It’s important to be careful with this approach; your customers deserve to
have high-quality testing, staging, and pre-release support as much as they
need high-quality production platforms. If you are regularly releasing
broken systems to lower environments because you have not invested in
sufficient planning and testing of your changes before this step, go back and
invest more into those processes to ensure that your testing is catching fewer
issues. But as long as the pre-release environment is kept reasonably stable,
it is far better to “test in pre” than “test in prod” by getting real feedback
through this early staged launch.

-- 374 of 630 --

Tranches, Slow Rollouts, and Staying a Version
Behind
Finally, all of those good practices from modern release management of
product features apply: canary releases, slow rollouts to tranches of
machines, releasing to subsets of customers, beta releases. These all play a
role in getting your platform changes safely to production without creating
massive failures.
For internal platforms, there is also some wisdom in staying a little bit
behind the latest, greatest OSS releases for the underlying infrastructure.
This is especially true if you’re at a small company, have highly sensitive
infrastructure, or have limited money to invest in serious infrastructure
testing and validation—let the OSS community test and update on the
newest release before you adopt. Just don’t be so late adopting that you are
essentially “out of window” for community support and miss out on security
patches.
Planning for Rearchitectures
A common reason that necessary rearchitectures don’t happen is that they
get stuck in the planning phase and never get “funded.” Your lead engineer
analyzes the problems with the current architecture and writes a detailed
plan of what new architecture is needed to support the next level of platform

-- 375 of 630 --

maturity. An architectural review confirms that there is alignment from
engineering on what needs to be built. It looks like things should be ready to
start.
But when you do your annual planning math (as we laid out in Chapter 7),
you realize this would cut into your feature budget too much. You need
additional headcount if the rearchitecture is to happen, but leadership wants
the new headcount to go to new business initiatives, and even when
platform leadership gets some budget, it turns out every platform team has
its own rearchitectures ready to pitch—so management spreads the budget
around, leaving no team with enough headcount to get its rearchitecture off
the ground.
The most frustrating outcome is when you get told “let’s wait until next
year,” spend the next 12 months scraping away with incremental system
improvements to keep the old architecture operating at a scale it wasn’t built
for, and then come back in the next round of planning with what you think is
an even stronger case for why the rearchitecture is needed—but it backfires
because leadership views your demonstrated ability to scrape by as evidence
that a rearchitecture is not actually needed!
Is there a path out? Not in all cases. There are many platforms with lots of
architectural problems that do not make sense to rearchitect, because the
eventual benefits are not high enough when weighed against the costs and
risks to get there. But we have also seen many cases where this is what a

-- 376 of 630 --

team assumes, but a deeper analysis of value shows that an incremental
rearchitecture investment is worth it. This is the planning framework we use
to understand if that is the case:
1. Think big on final rearchitecture goals. Use a top-down approach to
focus on all the ways a completed rearchitecture adds value to the
business.
2. Factor in migration costs. Evaluate the migration costs that would be
required.
3. Determine major 12-month wins. Find high-value needs that are much
better when built in the new architecture and can be delivered much
faster than full delivery.
4. Get leadership buy-in, and be prepared to wait. Finding the right
combination of these can take iteration, including sometimes waiting in
the hope that some better options come along.
We’ll cover these in depth in the sections that follow.

-- 377 of 630 --

PLATFORM ANTIPATTERN: NEW HIRES LEADING THE REARCHITECTURE
We want to call out an antipattern that we have seen platform teams fall
into: letting newly hired engineers lead the rearchitecture of the platform.
This is especially tempting when the new engineer has experience from a
prior employer at the next level of platform maturity, and offers great
insights in questioning the status quo. The problem is that, while it may be
similar, the new architecture your organization needs is going to be different
from what they experienced at their last company—but they won’t be able
to see that clearly, as they will lack a full understanding of the details of
your current platform and the culture of your company, as well as
established trust relationships with the major users of the platform.
So, in the short term, these new hires can aid your rearchitecture by giving
feedback on your longer-tenured engineers’ proposals. But to set up both the
rearchitecture and the new hire for success, for their first 12 months they
should limit themselves to giving such feedback and contributing, rather
than leading big new initiatives themselves.
This can be a hard message for high achievers looking to build on their prior
learnings and prove themselves, so remember to spend a lot of personal time
in 1:1s in those first 12 months to show you are invested in their long-term
success, giving them the right projects to quickly build both their
understanding and their relationships.

-- 378 of 630 --

Step 1: Think Big on Final Rearchitecture Goals
At this step, you should be using a planning window of roughly three to five
years for full delivery, pushing for the very edge of what’s possible. This is
the step where lead engineers are often most excited. Finally, they get to sit
down like a principal engineer and build (on paper) a better architecture that
everyone will work toward. But you need to make sure their sights are set
high. Yes, be wary of the “architecture astronauts” who get overly excited
by visions of a future so extraordinary there’s no way you could ever make
it a reality. But not too wary—the later steps of the process are intended to
filter those out. If the plan is to improve how your architecture scales for
just one system capability like reliability, then you’re not thinking big
enough.
Look to all categories of system capability
Earlier we talked about the four categories of system capabilities, and a
rearchitecture should strive to make substantial progress on all four.
Questions to ask yourself in each category include:
Features
What features with substantial business value could a new
architecture enable that the existing architecture would struggle to
ever support well?

-- 379 of 630 --

Efficiency
Can you make the new system substantially more cost effective on
aggregate? Can you make the system perform much better for
growing workloads, so better performance becomes like a feature,
unlocking new application capabilities?
Reliability
Can you make the system substantially less likely to have operational
issues as it handles even more load than it does today?
Security
Can you make the system substantially less likely to be breached, or
substantially less costly to keep compliant?
Look at subsuming adjacent systems
Next, look to existing platforms or customer systems with capabilities
adjacent to the platform’s. Can you subsume all the requirements of any of
these within the rearchitected platform, to reduce overall system
complexity? In particular, look to similar systems that are significantly
smaller, narrower, or growing slower, such as shadow platforms. This may
be a chance to finally integrate them into a simpler whole.
Look to big bets around OSS and vendor systems

-- 380 of 630 --

This complements the last two areas. Look everywhere you use OSS and
vendor systems, and everywhere you have an in-house component that
duplicates popular OSS and vendor systems. Explicitly ask yourself whether
a big bet on a replacement unlocks significant new capabilities, particularly
with a view that the new architecture will be with you for the next 5–10
years. The areas to investigate are:
Replacing an existing OSS/vendor component with another system that
will allow you not only to unlock new features but also to ride the wave
of innovation around its ecosystem
Replacing an OSS/vendor component with something developed in-
house, so you can customize and optimize for your known use cases
There is a balance here. “Don’t compete with open source” sounds like a
wise engineering truism. But so too is “don’t chase the shiny technology of
today.” In the following sidebar, we recount a story of when we had to
evaluate such a case, and the framework we used for making the decision.

-- 381 of 630 --

EVALUATING A BIG BET ON AN OSS/VENDOR WAVE
One of the hardest architecture decisions you will face is when you have a
developed platform with a decent amount of success, and then something
with massive momentum in the open source or vendor world comes along.
On the one hand, people will pressure you to offer the new thing, certain it
will have massive upsides in capabilities as a new industry standard with far
more investment than you can offer in-house. On the other hand, making the

-- 382 of 630 --

jump means you have to think about how to migrate your current users to
the new thing, all with a risk that plenty of apparent next industry standards
fail to achieve what everyone believed they were destined for.
We went through this conundrum at a former employer, where we had a
Mesos-based compute platform running for about 20% of our total
workload. Then Kubernetes came along, and quickly generated momentum
and community excitement that was impossible to ignore.
We decided to take a big bet on it, based on three criteria:
1. Adjacent business need for large investment in rearchitecture.
Containerization coincided with our move from on premises to the public
cloud, which came with enough business value (and so headcount) that
we knew that over the next five years we would have enough engineers
on a rearchitecture project to ensure that the delivery and migration could
be done well.
2. Current platform had feature gaps in subsuming adjacent systems. Mesos
was great for the large-scale batch processes it managed, but it was clear
that Kubernetes had more “out of the box” support for a broader range of
tasks, and we would need this range to successfully containerize 100% of
our workloads.
3. Disparity in ecosystem trajectory. We could see a lot more momentum in
the Kubernetes ecosystem, from conference talks, conference sizes,
startup vendors building their business on it, and even Google trends. We

-- 383 of 630 --

also failed to find any companies making new bets on Mesos—everyone
in the “start from scratch” case was choosing Kubernetes.
At the time this was not an easy sell to all of our team, who found good
reasons to want to invest in improving the platform they had already built—
particularly as there were certain ways Mesos was better than Kubernetes.
However, we saw the bet as worth the costs, and in hindsight this proved
correct; Kubernetes has flourished, while Mesos has not.
We’ve talked to colleagues who had a different experience at other
companies, though: their platform teams faced the same Mesos versus
Kubernetes decision, and their bet on Kubernetes was wrong. This was
because Mesos was already running almost all of their compute load, and
they were already running on the public cloud, so the migration was more or
less a costly sideways move.
How do you navigate these trade-offs and make a good bet when faced with
a rising OSS core? If you’re not meeting all the criteria (feature gaps,
ecosystem trajectory, business value), be wary of rearchitecting around an
external technology.
Step 2: Factor in Migration Costs
This step is the first counterbalance to thinking big. In Chapter 9, we’ll go
deep into all the considerations in executing a successful migration. At this

-- 384 of 630 --

point of thinking about a rearchitecture, you need to plan for a plan, and
include that in your rearchitecture proposal.
Many great rearchitecture proposals fall apart due to the migration costs
they will eventually inflict. Or rather, we should say “should” fall apart,
because too often we have seen teams and leaders get caught up in their big
dreams of the future and wave their hands at what it means for existing
customers to migrate to it. We’ve seen proposals where only after we asked,
“How will existing customers move to it?” did the team consider the
migration implications. When they did that analysis, it became clear that the
proposed changes would require hundreds of development years to complete
—for example, migrating millions of lines of RDBMS-based code to a
key/value store, or migrating years’ worth of data-processing scripts off of
processing from a POSIX filesystem and onto an S3-type object store.
When your engineers are out of touch with business reality, ask a product
manager or engineering manager to help you see whether the migration
costs of your plan are reasonable. Finding the right balance between costs
and benefits can depend on how necessary the long-term rearchitecture wins
are, but if you’re not factoring the cost of migration into your proposal then
you’re missing a big part of the picture and risk losing support for your plan.
Step 3: Determine Major 12-Month Wins

-- 385 of 630 --

So you have a think-big rearchitecture proposal with reasonable migration
costs. Time to start, right? Unfortunately, you have more planning to do
first. Most rearchitectures take three to five years, and there are going to be
many changes in technology and the business over that period. It’s too risky
if the business will only start to see value toward the end of that timeline.
You need to deliver substantial value much sooner than that, partly because
of the business risk that if stakeholders have to wait years to see results,
politics could kill the project in the meantime, but also because the think-big
hypothesis itself has a risk of being wrong, and the best way to validate it
sooner is actually shipping something.
We like 12 months as a cycle time for these deliveries, because it’s normal
for business planning and it gives enough time to deliver a partial
implementation that still has substantial value. To find potential projects, a
good approach is having the lead engineer partner with the product manager
to dig into the product backlog for high-value features that were previously
deemed “too hard” given the current architecture. You are looking for three
things:
You can deliver them in 12 months as a partial implementation of the
new architecture.
They show off capabilities of the new architecture.
You can get a commitment from the stakeholders of at least one
application team to partner with you to immediately leverage the new
features in their application.

-- 386 of 630 --

All three of these conditions can be hard to satisfy, but the third is usually
the hardest. Often those close to the business can’t be sure enough of their
roadmaps to be confident they can commit to you. Even when they
recognize the potential long-term business value, there is a chance that
short-term priorities might crowd it out.
This uncertainty is an inevitable part of trying to build high-value things in a
changing business environment. The best way we have found to mitigate it
is not to lower the goal of seeking something high in value. Rather, we think
about having three goals that are accomplishable with the same initial work:
Goal 1: Something audacious that moves the needle for the chosen
business
Goal 2: Something smaller that still adds substantial new value to a
business (potentially a different one from Goal 1), which the old
architecture could not have done
Goal 3: Getting the new architecture components in production and
serving some amount of real customer load
You aim for Goal 1, but you know you have Goal 2 as your first fallback.
Thus, you have given yourself two ways (and ideally two partners) to
demonstrate the business value of the rearchitecture. Then, should
something unforeseen happen (on either your side or the customers’), you
can still fall back to Goal 3, getting the new components in production and
serving load.

-- 387 of 630 --

This is all to avoid the “long slog” type of outcome we talked about in the
previous chapter. Within a three- to five-year rearchitecture project, this is
the step that should be repeated every year—resetting with new goals, new
partners, and the next phase of the rearchitecture. If a team cannot deliver
any incremental value in a 12-month time frame (i.e., no part of the
rearchitecture is in production taking real load), a hard question to address is
whether you’ve learned anything from this delivery failure. Is this
rearchitecture really worth it, or are you falling victim to the second-system
effect?
Step 4: Get Leadership Buy-in, and Be Prepared
to Wait
Platform organizations usually have several rearchitectures to consider at
once. Growing businesses will have more than one “legacy” platform built
by earlier pioneers, and each one could use rearchitecture work to make it
more reliable, efficient, or secure, or give it new features.
Further, when platforms cause operational and support burdens, it is
common for teams to want to forgo the incremental systems improvements
we recommended in the previous chapter, and instead go all-in on replacing
everything as fast as possible. The title of Marianne Bellotti’s book on
managing aging computer systems and future-proofing modern ones, Kill It
with Fire (No Starch Press), captures this sentiment as a knee-jerk approach
that burns through money and engineering time.
4

-- 388 of 630 --

In a well-run organization, the platform organization’s leadership must
carefully evaluate whether a rearchitecture is the right thing to do, and
whether it’s the right time to do it. This is particularly the case when:
The rearchitecture requires additional headcount or internal transfers.
The rearchitecture demands substantial work from other teams, either in
terms of migrations or integrating other platforms.
The rearchitecture means that shorter-timeline improvements and
features will be implemented more slowly or delayed indefinitely.
The “audacious” business goal of the rearchitecture carries a lot of
reputational risk for the platform team if not done well or not done on
time.
None of these are reasons not to put forward such a plan. Just realize that
you are going to need three to five years of focused investment to succeed,
so you’ll want leadership buy-in sooner rather than later. They will have to
defend this plan to their own senior stakeholders and protect it through
unexpected events like layoffs, reorganizations, or high-priority mandates. If
a leader does not feel they were brought in to evaluate and commit to a
project’s value, it’s unlikely they are going to risk their own reputation to
defend it.
Given all of this, sometimes leaders will say “not at this time.” That can be a
tough blow. But remember, the costs here are large, and the future is
unpredictable; there’s no telling what new technologies and new

-- 389 of 630 --

opportunities for the business might appear. When faced with a proposal that
promises a good-but-maybe-not-great business impact to justify starting a
rearchitecture, the company may well be better off waiting for a great
technology with great business impact.
Wrapping Up
No matter how much it improves a platform’s security, reliability, efficiency,
or feature delivery capabilities, investing in rearchitectures is expensive.
Teams go wrong when they invest in too many at once, leading to a platform
organization getting a reputation for “building systems for the sake of
building systems.” The previous section aimed to give you some tools to
manage that risk; we will also provide some specific advice for leaders
balancing multiple conflicting rearchitecture requests in Chapter 11.
That said, it’s also a mistake to push back against the idea of doing
rearchitectures at all, believing that technology trends drive massive waves
of change every few years and so you should do nothing for now and hope
the business allows you to ride the next one that comes along. This mindset
is common in leaders with startup backgrounds, where business growth can
drive relatively large investment in new platforms built on new technology,
and each platform tends to be so much better than the last that existing
teams are happy to migrate in order to capture the new benefits.

-- 390 of 630 --

If you follow this approach, assuming you can always build a better v2 as
the business grows, over time the challenge of migrations will start to
dominate the discussion. Your new business-driven platform may not be the
best replacement for all of your customers, and their enthusiasm for
migrating to the newest offering will start to wane as the company grows
and they get busy focusing on the demands of their own areas. Those
pioneer-heavy teams that love to build new platforms don’t think about how
they will drive a reluctant customer base through a migration. Eventually
you can find yourself in a scenario where you have five platforms in the
same area, three of which you have deprecated with the other two not yet
ready for robust production usage. We’ll bet many of you are currently in
this situation, and the next chapter will help you with the migration planning
to dig yourselves out of it.
To avoid this outcome, invest in platform rearchitectures. Build guardrails
so the business is not disrupted by their execution, and invest in them
judiciously, where your confidence in the net benefits of the new technology
are highest. Anything less is a poor platform product strategy.
The phrase was introduced by Fred Brooks in his 1975 book The Mythical Man-Month (Addison-
Wesley).
It’s important to note that Brooks recommends hiring people who have at least two of this type of
system under their belts in order to avoid this problem; indeed, we find that when you have people on
your team who have gone through a big system design a few times you are less likely to end up trying
to build a new v2 in the first place!
1
2

-- 391 of 630 --

You only live once.
At startups we’ve heard the term “legacy” applied to platforms that were less than six months old!
3
4

-- 392 of 630 --

Chapter 9. Migrations and Sunsetting of
Platforms
A platform is meant to be the stable thing that provides an enduring
surface to build on, like a foundation. Platform engineering requires
building those stable foundations and not externalizing work onto the
things that people build on top of it.
—C. Scott Andreas
The relentless pace of change creates an existential challenge for platform
engineering teams. Your underlying systems are evolving all the time: there
are regular patches and upgrades to keep up with security issues, vendor
changes, hardware updates, and new features. End-of-life timelines for
fundamental infrastructure systems, once spanning a decade, have
compressed to one to two years for cloud products like EKS, increasing the
frequency of upgrade disruption on application teams. Without a plan to
manage the impact of these changes on application developers, platforms
become a source of migration pain that outweighs their value.
We’ve mentioned migrations several times already in this book, and for
good reason. In the face of this challenge, great platform teams realize that
migrations are in fact an opportunity to prove their value. They see their job

-- 393 of 630 --

as easing the pain of mandatory migrations, limiting and even removing
work so their customers can focus on delivering top-line features.
NOTE
For the purposes of this chapter, a migration is any mandatory change to your platforms that requires
some work by the users in order to adopt. This is a spectrum from the most complex work of
migrating physical locations (say, from one data center to another), to migrations due to code or
systems upgrades that have backward-breaking API changes, to upgrades that may be in-place or
nearly in-place but require acceptance testing from some users to ensure there are no regressions.
In this chapter, we share our advice for doing migrations right. First, we’ll
look at them from an engineering perspective, considering what you have to
build into your platforms to make migrations as easy as possible for your
customers. Next, we’ll discuss best practices around coordination, and how
to make your communication and execution as smooth as possible. Finally,
we cover a migration to nothing—“sunsetting” a platform. We’ll talk about
how to handle the difficult case when your platform has customers, but it
doesn’t make sense to operate as a platform any more.
But before we get into doing them right, let’s review some of the common
antipatterns we have experienced during migrations.
Migration Antipatterns

-- 394 of 630 --

For many engineers there’s no dirtier term than “migration,” and the bigger
the company, the worse these migrations become. Despite executives
promising after every painful migration that things will be better next time,
we see these same antipatterns play out repeatedly:
Context-free deadlines
If you’ve never experienced the random migration deadline handed
down from on high, consider yourself lucky. The deadline might
come from necessity (say, the end-of-life date for some essential
piece of the stack), but it’s often thrown out to teams with no
discussion or appreciation for what others will have to defer in order
to meet this deadline. Worse, somehow these deadlines are always
short notice. It might be that the migration turned into a big deal only
because everyone ignored it for months, but that doesn’t make
anyone feel much better about the deadline scramble.
Unclear requirements
Too often, migration requests come with the expectation that every
user understands exactly what they need to do. The team sends out a
notice that starts with “If you’re using Product X version Y or
earlier…” and half of the users don’t even know what Product X is,
so they either ignore the notice or spend hours figuring out whether it
applies to them, wasting everyone’s time in the process.
Did anyone test this thing?

-- 395 of 630 --

A set of users is already stressed out, and then they try to migrate and
the new offering just…doesn’t work. Maybe it’s just something they
have to figure out, like upgrading performance-sensitive C++ code
between operating system versions, but often it seems like the team
that owns the platform just didn’t think about how people were using
it before kicking off the migration. There are gaps in the new
offering, broken features, or a completely missing set of instructions
for how to proceed. The platform team scrambles to get it fixed or
work around the gaps, and in the process piles on tech debt just to
make the deadline.
Clipboard-carrying scolds
Then there are the people tasked with chasing down users to make
sure they did the migration work. This is a thankless job, and we’re
sure everyone who has found themselves in clipboard-carrying mode
knows it. You have to push people to come to meeting after meeting
and talk about whether they are on track, why not, and what it will
take to get there. You may use “wall of shame” dashboards and
reports that attempt to gamify the whole thing, but they just add to
the stress, defensiveness, and frustration of those in the red
(particularly when they have tried to migrate only to get blocked by
missing or broken features!). Once you’re at this point, brute-forcing
yourself through the exercise, it’s unlikely you have time to think
about better ways to approach the problem.

-- 396 of 630 --

Yes, there’s a lot of hard up-front work that needs to be done to prepare
clear requirements and test your migrations before asking your users to
migrate. And yes, sometimes the only way to unblock a project is to create
a context-free deadline and put people in place to enforce it. And when
you’ve done as much up-front work as you can and the organizational
inertia is still dragging the project down, deadlines and clipboards may be
necessary as an option of last resort. Just remember they’re the option of
last resort, not the default approach.
Engineering Easier Migrations
Many human-oriented aspects need to be handled during migrations, but the
first approach platform teams should use is an engineering one. Before you
start on the communication planning, the inevitable program management,
and the other rules and processes you might need to impose, think about the
engineering you can do to ease migration pain now and in the future.

-- 397 of 630 --

TACKLE MIGRATIONS EARLY
Migrations start as an annoyance and grow into a strategic opportunity only
when your company and software complexity reach a certain scale. At a
smaller company, migrations are annoying, but you can often just lean on
the goodwill of your colleagues and the hard work of a few scrappy
engineers to drive them to completion. However, if you follow our advice
and avoid building out a platform engineering team until you’re a bit larger,
migrations quickly become one of the biggest challenges. The scrappy get
’er done energy that worked when you had a few dozen engineers starts to
break down when you have a few hundred. The engineering organization
that wants to move as fast as it did when it was small must wrestle with all
of the complexity that comes with time, scale, and success, and migrations
become a growing source of frustration and anger for them.
Migration support should therefore be one of the first things you tackle with
a new platform engineering team, especially if your company is growing
quickly and you want to keep moving fast. By this we don’t mean starting
on the perfect rearchitecture to make future migrations cheap. We mean
doing whatever scrappy work you can to make the next pressing migration
as cheap as you can.
Use Product Abstractions That Minimize Glue
and Limit Variation

-- 398 of 630 --

In Chapter 1, we introduced our definition of “glue”: the code, automation,
and configuration built to hold a bunch of disparate systems together. Glue
is OK in moderation, but the more glue that exists, the more work is
required whenever one of the pieces needs to change. The problem is worst
when every application team has created lots of it—platforms should limit
the glue that each application team builds for itself over basic infrastructure
and common services, because glue is the enemy of change.
If you have built a good platform abstraction, application teams will have
minimal glue of their own to change during migration of the underlying
components. If you have limited the number of versions of the same system
you offer, you’ll have less testing to perform when that system needs to
change. The more you can standardize and limit variation, the fewer
permutations you need to worry about during these changes.
Architect for Transparent Migrations
The easiest migration experience for your customer is one they not only
don’t have to do any work for, but never even see. As C. Scott Andreas says
in this chapter’s opening quote, a platform needs to provide an enduring
surface for application teams to build on. An ideal platform provides a
stable interface to the customer, allowing the platform team to execute the
migrations with minimal to no customer impact. Pushing frequent migration
work onto your customers undermines that value, and as the platform
builder and operator, you can do better.

-- 399 of 630 --

One way of doing this is with abstract APIs; however, back in Part I of the
book, we warned of the folly of overinvesting in a pure “encapsulation”
approach. Instead, we think transparent migrations are better achieved with
a combination of judicious APIs and newer technologies that make it much
easier to run multiple versions of your platform in production during the
migration period, slowly and safely moving each customer’s requests across
as their clients are updated. These technologies include:
Container-based packaging for fast, lightweight application deployment
Autoscaling technologies that support changing the size of systems
without restarting
Deployment techniques such as canary and blue/green deployments,
combined with advanced health monitoring to detect problems and roll
back quickly
These practices make life easier for application teams deploying and scaling
their software, but they also support platform teams’ ability to manage and
update the platform without disrupting the application developers. Yet, to
take the most advantage of them, you may need to establish some
agreements with your users up front. These agreements include:
Chaos testing and stability guarantees
If you want to do a blue/green upgrade, you need to be able to
migrate workloads and eventually kill the old processes. However, if
your users expect that the underlying system will never restart unless

-- 400 of 630 --

they tell it to, they won’t be able to handle this unplanned change. To
address this, we’ve had teams add an automatic chaos element to
their managed Kubernetes offering, which randomly restarted
customer nodes. This default offering forced customers to detect
and fix certain types of structural bugs, and got them used to
operating applications in an environment where they did not have
control over the underlying infrastructure and where infrastructure
providers could restart their instances.
Acceptance tests
You want to know that your upgrade didn’t break anything for your
users, but how can you achieve this? One approach is to ask users to
maintain a set of acceptance tests that you can run to validate that
their applications work after a platform change. And of course, your
platform team needs to have a thorough set of its own acceptance
tests (ideally, a sample application that you own and operate) as the
first pass for validation.
Maintenance windows
True, there’s nothing “cloud native” about maintenance windows, but
depending on the type of platform you are providing, you may need
occasional planned downtime. If this is the case for your system,
don’t try to negotiate this ad hoc every time you need it. Create an
1

-- 401 of 630 --

up-front expectation of when maintenance downtime is allowed so
that both your team and your users can plan for these disruptions.
In “Guardrails for Rearchitectures”, we mentioned some of the practices
that big technology companies use for testing and rolling out changes to
their wider fleet of systems in order to minimize customer impact, and these
practices also support this operator-driven migration model. At a small
company you may not have the bandwidth to invest in these advanced
guardrails, but understanding what a mature model looks like can provide
some ideas for where you might go in the future. Any small investments
you can make now, such as establishing maintenance windows and setting
up your own sample application for acceptance testing, are valuable gifts to
your future platform team.

-- 402 of 630 --

DO MONOREPOS HELP WITH MIGRATIONS?
At some bigger tech companies, monorepos are a popular solution to
managing changes to common code—and since everything is code in the
end, this raises the question of how much they help with migrations. The
nice part of having a monorepo is that you can see into code-level
dependencies and can potentially make changes across the entire repository;
platform teams can even change the customer code themselves when
needed. In practice, this value is much higher for pure in-house library
changes than it is for platform migrations more generally, for two reasons:
Platforms usually have a service component, which means that any
change that impacts the clients and APIs is not complete until all clients
have redeployed. Because customer systems will not redeploy on your
schedule, you will need to support multiple versions of your client and
APIs in production.
Platforms often have thick clients that depend on external code supplied
by OSS and vendor systems. Changes to those libraries can have a broad
impact on customer applications, which may use them directly for other
purposes. This means changes become much more coupled, and thus
more impactful and riskier. In the non-monorepo world, this can be
managed by versioning internal clients. This can be done with
monorepos as well, but that defeats the whole value of a monorepo for
this purpose.

-- 403 of 630 --

The value of monorepos for any company depends on both its culture and
its other technology choices (see Chapter 5), but they are not a path to
making most platform migrations significantly cheaper.
Track Usage Metadata
One of the trickiest parts of migrating systems is understanding
dependencies. As you build more interconnected platforms, you need to
know how applications use the different pieces across your platforms—for
product metrics, as mentioned in Chapter 5, but also for operations,
upgrades, and migrations. Building automatic asset tracking for
technologies, deployments, and dependencies and creating graphs of the
existing running infrastructure across your company can be extremely
valuable in supporting more complex upgrades. This sort of automatic
tracking is much easier to build as a smaller company than to backfill into
an older, legacy environment.
Things to track include:
Who is using the platform
Which applications are using the platform, and which parts of it they are
using
Who owns those applications

-- 404 of 630 --

Because it is platform-specific, we can’t tell you every detail you might
need to track for future upgrades. Our goal is to inspire you to think about
this as part of the platform organization’s work. Make sure you gather
metadata about the state of the world, know what is deployed where, and
understand how to tie code for deployments to people and teams—this is all
powerful knowledge to collect early in your platform engineering journey.

-- 405 of 630 --

CENTRALLY TRACK OWNERSHIP METADATA
Tracking ownership metadata—which teams or individuals own specific
systems and processes—will help you run smooth migrations, target your
communication, and operate the platform well. While each platform could
track this separately, we have found it valuable to centralize this
information to avoid suffering from organizational drift or changes in the
organization that haven’t been reconciled with the technology.
Anyone who has worked for a company in its growth stages has probably
observed the following scenario: a lot of people have come and gone over
the years, and now there are a number of technology assets that are still
used but that no one seems to own. This might not happen for the most
critical systems, but there are often things like cron jobs that no one has
looked at for ages, or forgotten data pipelines that just keep on running until
they break and everyone scrambles to figure out who’s responsible for
fixing them.
This is one of the hidden challenges of platform engineering: organizational
drift can hamper your ability to evolve the platform itself. When a massive
data pipeline is hogging platform resources and no one owns the pipeline to
fix the resource issues, the platform team is stuck in a bad place. It’s usually
not realistic to expect platform engineers to take on the burden of fixing
business systems; they can help application developers do this, but they
can’t own those applications or processes in the long term. If these systems

-- 406 of 630 --

are important to running business processes, then they need clear
ownership.
Depending on the state of your company, you may have to tackle this
organizational drift in order to create a platform that you can maintain over
time. This doesn’t mean it is your job to solve organizational drift, but if no
one else is thinking about how all the systems get notified of and react to
organizational changes, it falls to you to prompt these conversations. Start
by partnering with HR to get clarity about offboarding processes and what
the system of record is for employment/team status. With a documented
system for recording employment changes, you can then work with the rest
of engineering to agree on how jobs, systems, and other technology
processes should track to human ownership so that they can be
automatically reassigned when people leave the company or move teams.
This is one of the reasons we call out ownership metadata in Chapter 2.
This is a challenging problem even outside the dynamic world of elastic
cloud resources. Without a strategy to address ownership tracking, you
seriously hinder your ability to maintain and operate your platforms (not to
mention all of the security risks from lack of access visibility!).
Develop Automation to Avoid Clipboards

-- 407 of 630 --

A good platform team makes the experience of migration as painless as
possible for their customers through careful planning and automation. A
bad platform team, on the other hand, exposes developers to a great deal of
churn and pain with updates and migrations that require significant work
and planning on the part of the engineering teams themselves. We know it’s
hard to vet the impact of a big change on customer workloads, especially
when your platform supports a diverse set of performance-sensitive
workloads. But rather than giving up and running everything through
human clipboard carriers, you can use this as an opportunity to think about
your system design and how it can evolve to support automation of this
work.
Camille once managed a base platform team that owned, among other
things, the standard Linux distributions. The company had a lot of
performance-sensitive C/C++, so handling an upgrade to these distributions
was a painful process. In fact, when Camille joined, the team was still in the
process of a delayed upgrade that had dragged on for so long that they were
at risk of losing vendor support for even the newer version of the
distribution. The challenge was that their customers found the work they
needed to do to verify the new version too tedious and time-consuming, and
it took constant nagging and follow-up to figure out who was behind and
what was going on. They eventually got the migration done, but not without
scars, and when it came time to do the next version there was immediate
fear from the team about the timeline and resistance from the customers.

-- 408 of 630 --

The team asked Camille for headcount to hire project managers to manage
the upgrade. They felt it was such a complex project that having humans in
the loop would be necessary for success. She was not sure, and pushed back
with the following instructions: “I will allow hiring of project managers
only when you’ve proven to me that we have done everything we can to
automate the work that those project managers might do. Show me that
we’ve tried to do this without project management and hit the wall, and we
can hire. Until then, be creative.”
The outcome was brilliant. The team took the pushback seriously, and
started to think about why these upgrades were so complex. Part of the
complexity was that the upgrades were actually a tree of dependencies. One
system couldn’t be upgraded until they had validated and completed the
work on a subsystem. So, the first step was building out a map of those
dependencies and tying that into a project migration cadence. The system
would detect when a set of dependencies had been completed, and only then
release work on the next step. In this way, they built up a series of
observability and tracking workflow tools that were built with the
customers in mind. What would make the job easy for the users who needed
to upgrade? Which parts of the upgrade could they automate entirely?
Which parts could they explain in the context of the ticket that a user got
when it was time for their system to proceed?
This didn’t completely remove the need for some human-driven project
management, and toward the end of the project some of the team ended up

-- 409 of 630 --

working with project managers to finish the process. But the migration was
a significant step forward as compared to prior updates, because the team
took the time up front not only to plan the migration itself, but also to think
about tooling, automation, observability, and customer-centric approaches
to ease the pain for everyone involved in the process.
This is a great example of a platform team doing the right thing. Even in a
world where they could not auto-migrate everyone, the team took on so
much of the heavy lifting that there was little debate when it came time for
the customers to finish the process. And this spells out one of the basic
requirements for any team attempting to become a modern platform team:
you must plan for and take on the bulk of the work for customer migrations
if you want to claim this role.
Document On-Ramps and Off-Ramps
Sometimes the migration you are driving is not one that you can automate
for your customers. Perhaps you’ve created a new service management
platform, and using it requires customers to move their applications from
the old platform (or even their old bare-metal servers) to your new offering.
When you are driving a migration of this sort, it’s important that you
consider the on-ramps and off-ramps you build to make it easy for people to
get off the old systems and onto yours.

-- 410 of 630 --

In the case of a service platform, for example, your customers may want to
experiment with moving over parts of their systems to test that the new
platform works for them, before moving all of the traffic to the new
offering. Showing them how to do these partial migrations (either through
tooling that you build or detailed documentation of the process using
tooling that already exists) is important to support the off-ramp from the old
system and the on-ramp to the new one.
We have not written much about usage-level documentation—by which we
mean things you see created by tech writers for SaaS vendors like verbose
descriptions of APIs, code samples, and deep getting started guides. The
reason for this is that few companies have support for creating good
documentation of this kind, and leaving it to the engineers as yet another
job is likely to lead to poorly written and rapidly out of date documentation
that does as much to confuse people as it does to educate them. But
migrations are a case where good usage-level documentation can be a major
differentiator, and given that they are a one-off exercise, you can often write
it once and forgo the concern about it becoming outdated. In this situation,
it’s worth an investment to create solid documentation that supports the
effort, possibly even hiring professional tech writers to produce it.
So how do you figure out what automation and documentation you need to
support the migration? The answer to that question is dogfooding and
partnership. If you can, have other platform teams go through the migration
process as alpha testers. Using your own platforms during development is a
2

-- 411 of 630 --

useful, if incomplete, test of their suitability and usability. Once you’re
ready, approach your advanced customers who may want to be early
adopters to get access to new features. These first real customers will give
you the opportunity to experience the platform and the migration practices
through fresh eyes. Having members of your team embed in theirs and
support the migration of these early customers will give you important
insights not just into bugs and feature gaps, but also into missing tools and
automation that will facilitate the process. As you take early teams through
the migration, you have a chance to smooth out the process for the rest of
the customer base and document the steps necessary to onboard
successfully.
Coordinating Smoother Migrations
While you should do everything you can from the last section to make
migrations transparent, most migrations will require some amount of
coordination with your customers. What does it mean to do that well?
Migrations are never easy, but they can be easier, and there are many things
you can do to make it so. In this section we’ll cover the most important
things to do to ensure the easiest transition for your customers, and balance
your own team’s workload in the process.
Scope, Limit, and Prioritize Planned Changes

-- 412 of 630 --

Similar to limiting the coupling of the systems themselves, you need to
limit the accidental overlapping of migrations across your platform. This
takes three forms:
Scope backward from hard deadlines in the next 12 months.
Some migrations will be completely beyond the platform team’s
control. If an OSS library is being deprecated or a vendor is
demanding a change to the way its APIs are called, these
“immovable objects” will restrict the choices you can make later, and
you’ll need to work out as soon as possible how you will migrate
ahead of them.
One thing to highlight is the nominal “12 months” here. This is based
on our careers’ worth of experience that OSS and vendor dates
beyond this horizon, no matter how “hard” they claim to be, are far
more nominal than they first seem. When a wide swath of the
industry is affected, dates will slip, and often industry-wide solutions
will come forward so you don’t need to build your own (an example
of this was AWS shipping its “Classiclink” VPC migration feature in
2015, meaning customers no longer needed to create bespoke
solutions). In light of this, attempting to force your users to migrate
today on the basis of an event that will take place well beyond their
planning period will at best create a lot of friction, and quite often it
will be wasted work even if they agree.

-- 413 of 630 --

For deadlines more than 12 months out, spend the additional time
doing everything we mentioned in the previous section that you can
to make the migration easier. Leave the heavy coordination planning
until you are closer to that 12-month time frame, at which point you
should have a good and, notably, easy-to-follow process to ask of
your users.
Limit coupling of in-flight customer work.
Are you saving customers effort by coupling the data center
migration with an upgrade to the databases, or are you making it that
much harder for them to complete either of these? There are times
when it makes sense to do a group of changes together but it’s better
if the grouped changes happen internally to the platform, leaving the
customer to see only one piece of work. This can be subtle:
When you’re doing a migration that is more than a lift-and-shift
for customers, such as one that requires them to rearchitect some
parts of their system, it might make sense to couple it with other
critical work. For example, if customers are moving from on-
premises VMs to container-based compute in the public cloud,
bundling that with an update to the authentication system might
not add much complexity to the overall project. This approach
makes the most sense when the migration is somewhat optional
and there is a lot of value for the application teams to go through
the rearchitecture.

-- 414 of 630 --

If you have a hard deadline for the initiative—for example, the
end of your data center lease, or the vendor contract end date for
a piece of infrastructure—you’ll want to limit other changes to
help people get through the process. It’s reasonable that you don’t
want to or can’t support the oldest legacy systems in the new data
center, but resist the temptation to pile on restriction after
restriction with the idea that you can get application teams to fix
things you don’t like or free you from some of your legacy
systems just because they have to migrate anyway.
Keep track of your major outstanding requests, and prioritize.
Do you really need to do a major upgrade of the operating system
and change the approach you use for authentication across the
company in the same quarter? As part of your roadmap planning,
platform leadership should see planned migrations and major
changes. Don’t be afraid to ask questions about whether these
migrations should happen at the same time, what the impact of these
changes will be to other parts of the platform, and whether the plans
have accounted for these overlaps.
This is important not just for helping your customers, but also for the
sake of your own teams. How well can you test the impact of
multiple simultaneous changes on your own platforms? It’s one thing
to bring together new components into a new platform offering, as

-- 415 of 630 --

with our public cloud migration example, but if you’re trying to do a
build and test system migration at the same time you’re changing the
object storage used for build artifacts, untangling the impact of these
simultaneous changes on performance problems for artifact retrieval
can get very messy.
Communicate Early and Publicly
Context-free deadlines are one of the great frustrations that customers
experience during migrations—but how can you avoid these deadlines,
knowing that users tend to procrastinate on migration-related work until it
turns into a fire drill? The answer lies in your communication strategy.
The first step is to tell customers about migrations as soon as you know that
they are coming (with the caveat that this should be information-only for
most deadlines more than 12 months out). When the migrations are driven
by updates in underlying systems (say, your OS or database version going
end of life), you usually have a good deal of warning, and not as much
flexibility on the due date. These deadlines can be built into the roadmaps
that you communicate to your customers, and repeated through newsletters,
quarterly planning sessions, and other frequent customer engagements. For
changes that also require changes at your own platform layer, you may want
to hold off on communicating until you are confident that the project is
closer to shipping and you know what the work involved will be—perhaps

-- 416 of 630 --

once you’ve got an alpha customer using the new version and are confident
the change is what you want.
The larger your platform gets and the more pieces you have in play, the
harder this early communication can become. At large scale, application
engineering teams often designate someone to evaluate the incoming
platform migration requests, check the specifications, and then
communicate these requests out to the application engineers once they have
verified that the requests make sense and are actionable. While this may be
inevitable beyond a certain scale of company, it often comes as a reaction to
disorganization within the platform and infrastructure teams themselves.
When you’re at a big enough scale that your customers are creating
migration intake roles, it’s time for you to formalize migration coordination
for your platforms. The customer coordination may be done best by a
project manager (or, depending on the size of your company, a whole team
of them), but most of the work to support this role needs to happen during
the team’s annual bottom-up planning process. Some checks to add to that
process include:
Across the core platform areas, where are there known major changes
coming that will require customer work?
Have you thought about where you can bundle related changes to reduce
the customers’ work, and where you might delay certain migrations due
to already planned churn?

-- 417 of 630 --

Does your plan give you enough confidence that you can use it to
communicate the major changes for the next two to three quarters, so
that your customer teams can plan to absorb them?
Beyond all of this, it’s helpful to have a dedicated communication and
support channel during the course of the migration, separate from your
normal support and on-call rotations. If the channel is public and well
curated, customers will often help one another through common gotchas.
You can use the channel to collect FAQs to document and to identify rough
edges to automate. This can be useful even in cases where you don’t have
or need a full migration coordination center.
Push Through the Final 20%
So, you’ve decided to take ownership of migrations. You’ve done a lot of
work to ease the impact for your customers through automation, better
communication, and even doing the migration for them. But when you look
at where you’ve gotten, you realize that you’ve covered maybe 80% of the
overall workload. Unfortunately, the remaining 20% is still there, and if you
want to fully remove the old version or legacy system, that 20% will still
need to be migrated.
What now? As with so many projects, the final 20% can seem even harder
than the first 80% (and the last 5% might seem downright impossible).
Maybe these are the highest-risk applications, or the oldest, the most

-- 418 of 630 --

critical, or the most customized. It’s natural that you would focus on the
migration work that gets the most customers finished first, but this long tail
can’t be ignored forever. As you start on this final set, you will inevitably
discover new complications that you’ll need to resolve if you hope to
complete the work.
The first complication is that your migration is going to take longer than
you think, and someone will need to run the old system for as long as it
takes to finish the migration. You may want to minimize the work you put
into the old system. However, if you allow most of the team to focus
entirely on the new system, then those who are stuck on the legacy system
may feel underappreciated, worry where their careers are going, burn out
due to the combined stress of a limited support rota and a creaky legacy
platform, and ultimately leave the team. You’ll want to figure out the
balance of work to put into the old system versus the new one during these
final stages of migration ahead of time, so you don’t end up relying on a
couple of long-serving employees to hold things together for the final
months.
You can expect to run into some unexpected issues in the later stages of the
project. If you are running this platform in an on-prem environment, you
may want to stop buying new hardware for the old platform, but then what
happens if that old hardware needs to be retired before the migration is
complete? Camille oversaw a migration that was in its final stages when the
data center team insisted that the old servers had to be replaced because the

-- 419 of 630 --

fans were dying. Her team had to negotiate to get that team to do extra work
to repurpose or replace just the fans, so her team wouldn’t have to spend a
bunch of money for new servers that wouldn’t be needed six months after
purchase. At scale, you’ll inevitably miss some underlying dependency that
will lead to a scramble during this final drawn-out stage of a major
migration. Don’t panic; instead, draw on the ingenuity of your team to solve
the problem, and in the meantime make sure you are communicating this
risk to anyone who might care (or could help!).
Finally, it’s not always obvious who should be responsible for the last 20%
of the work. This depends on the characteristics of the applications that
need to be migrated, and sometimes you don’t own those applications. Will
the platform team be responsible? Will the application teams be
responsible? You may discover that the new system just won’t work for
some of the edge-case users, which means you’ll need to go through a
sunsetting process, as discussed in the next section. For the rest, there’s
likely to be an ongoing negotiation between your team and the application
teams, so be prepared. How much power you have to mandate the
completion of the migration on a certain timeline (or at all) depends on your
organization’s culture. For a culture that prefers carrots to sticks, you may
need to do more work to sell the platform to the laggards. Either way, the
better the new platform and the better the experience of those who have
already migrated, the easier this debate will become, because more people
will trust you and want to use the new offering. But easier is not easy, and

-- 420 of 630 --

in the case of legacy applications with minimal customer ownership, expect
significant pushback on having to do this work.
Use Mandates Sparingly
Finally, let’s talk about a people challenge with migrations, particularly at
scale. If you worked at a scaled company when it was smaller, you know
that in the past you may have been able to get people to give you the benefit
of the doubt on a migration. They knew you personally, and they knew your
team; you were all still in the “one team, one dream” stage of company
development. But as a company grows, or if you’re a leader who has
recently joined a new organization, you don’t have that built-in trust that
comes from deep personal connections. Furthermore, it’s likely that your
customers will have already seen migrations go sideways. Even if you
personally have always run effective, well-communicated migrations,
they’ll have worked at other companies where this wasn’t the case. They
are going to instinctively fight you on even thinking about the work they
might need to do to support a migration.
“Ah,” you might be thinking, “well, this stuff is so important that we’ll
simply get the CTO to issue a mandate to everyone that they must complete
this migration! It worked for Amazon in moving to services, it worked for
my friend’s company when they moved to the cloud, so surely we can get
this support!”

-- 421 of 630 --

You might get lucky and get agreements on top-down mandates once in a
while, for truly critical initiatives. But at scale, you are competing with
many other initiatives that also must be completed, from cost-cutting
measures to compliance and security initiatives to business expansions.
There’s only so much attention a company can give to mandates, and even
if the leadership is willing to set these mandates, at a certain point people
will stop paying attention to them.
We advise you to save your mandate requests for the things that are
essential and, if possible, align them with satisfying other mandatory efforts
(or even better, align them with major product initiatives!). If your platform
improves the security posture and saves money, you may be able to go in
with the CISO and the CFO to request that this be one of the few mandates
of the year. If the business wants to change the pricing model, this might be
a great chance to uplift the billing platform. Strategically planning
migrations as part of other important work is usually more effective than
annoying your customers with random unscheduled mandatory work that
doesn’t seem to have any alignment with the other random unscheduled
mandatory work coming at them.
Mandates may be necessary to drive that final 20% of a migration effort.
There may be a lot of pain in the migration, but there’s bound to be just as
much pain (and even more risk) in keeping the old thing running, and
sometimes the company needs a senior leader to say “we all know this is
the right thing” to actually get all parties to commit to doing that right thing.

-- 422 of 630 --

However, platform teams should take care to avoid using the mandate
approach too often, as this can create a culture in which it seems like the
application engineers only exist to make the platform team’s projects
happen, as opposed to serving the business.
Sunsetting Platforms
In the previous discussion of migrations, we have taken one thing for
granted: you might be moving people from one system to another, but these
migrations don’t remove functionality. In the case where you are not only
asking people to move off of a platform but don’t have a near-equivalent
system for them to move onto, you are not just asking for a migration; you
are sunsetting a system. In this situation, you may not have the capacity to
support a full migration for the platform’s users, but you’ll still want to ease
their transition as best you can.
Deciding When to Sunset
There are plenty of reasons to sunset legacy systems: lack of people who
understand the old system and can support it, security and compliance gaps,
a vendor going out of business, and more. In the case of widely used legacy
systems that need to be turned off for any of these reasons, don’t go directly
to sunsetting. Instead, we recommend that you first figure out a path to
another offering, building something new or adding features to an existing

-- 423 of 630 --

platform if necessary, so that you can follow the processes established for a
migration, rather than a sunset.
True sunsetting—that is, turning something off without offering an
equivalent—should be reserved for the cases that follow:
1. There are not very many users. You may have prematurely expanded
your product to support many different configurations with the
expectation that your customers would demand that variety. This often
happens with offerings like databases, messaging systems, or
observability tooling. Some teams get very opinionated about these types
of offerings and insist that they must have certain advanced
configurations enabled, or additional plug-ins that no one else needs.
Another common driver for this is a new product team that insists on a
specific subtype of a common system: for example, they must have this
graph database because they need one feature that your standard offering
doesn’t support. This is a product gamble that does not always pay off,
and you may end up supporting a whole stack of infrastructure and
integrations for a single team.
And sometimes you just build a new workflow that you think will
revolutionize people’s experience and it turns out only a tiny group of
users ever latches on. This can happen with superuser features, for
example. We’ve made this mistake in developer tooling for teams that
wanted a very particular interaction model with version control, code
review, and testing. These noisy customers turned out to be a very small

-- 424 of 630 --

subset of our overall customer base, and the interaction model we built
was painful to maintain in the face of other changes; eventually, we had
to remove the advanced features because they were too expensive to
support for the few users who wanted them.
WARNING
Sunsetting should be used only at the very tail end of a migration, when you are down to a small
set of customers who are deeply coupled to some feature that is not and cannot be supported by
the new system. This often happens when you are rearchitecting a scrappy platform to something
more scalable, and you need to eliminate features that don’t make sense to offer in a system built
for the next order of magnitude of scale.
Platform engineering teams can sometimes lack empathy in dealing with such customers, taking
an attitude along the lines of “they should have known that would never scale, so they need to
deal with it and figure out how to move off anyway.” Needless to say, this is not a product-centric
approach, and when you try this with a feature that is critical for more than a small number of
edge cases, you may generate enough backlash to force you to support both offerings indefinitely.
If you’re going to remove critical features you should make sure they really impact only the tail
0.1% of use cases, and begin the sunsetting only after early consideration and communication of
all options.
2. The cost of supporting the offering is high. If the system runs itself, you
may not care that it has low adoption, but when the support burden for a
particular feature or offering is high but it has few users, that is a sign
that you need to do something. If you don’t see a path to increasing
adoption, you may need to sunset the offering to reduce the burden for
your team. The cost may not come directly in system support, but
indirectly in expanding the overall offering. When a feature is complex

-- 425 of 630 --

and fragile, it can make other changes to the platform harder as well—
this is often the case for supporting unusual workflows and other
superuser offerings.
3. You have other things you want to focus on. Finally, there are times when
you need to get more focus from your team on higher-priority work, and
the only way to do that is to get rid of distractions. When you have an
offering that requires continual engineering investment that you need to
redirect elsewhere, this can be a sign that you need to sunset the offering
to free up bandwidth for other things.
If you are sunsetting because of pressure to deliver in other areas, get
specific about where you might redeploy people once the sunsetting is
complete. This information should be part of the communication plan to
your impacted users and stakeholders, particularly if they are interested in
the area that you are reinvesting in.

-- 426 of 630 --

SOMETIMES IT’S THE BUILDERS WHO RESIST SUNSETTING, NOT THE
CUSTOMERS
Sunsetting is often required for projects that just didn’t quite go as planned,
where the team really believes in their vision but hasn’t managed to get it to
work. One memorable sunsetting we oversaw was the removal of a build
and test tool that the team had been trying to make work for years. They
had managed to get far enough that a few application teams were using it,
but there was no clear path to getting everyone onto the new offering.
Furthermore, the problems with the system that had driven the team to try
this new offering had mostly been resolved, and trying to support both the
old and new systems was becoming too much for them to handle.
One of the hardest parts of this project was getting the team to realize that
the new tool was going nowhere, and despite their best efforts, it wasn’t
worth the continued investment. They wanted so much for the thing they
had invested in to succeed that getting them to accept that the project was at
a dead end was nearly as hard as getting the tool itself sunsetted and
removed. In fact, we think this is one of the more common challenges that
leaders have with sunsetting exercises, because while customers can be
frustrated that they have to migrate or give up a feature, the teams that built
that feature are often even more attached to the sunk cost they’ve put in so
far. It’s never fun to tell someone to kill their darling.
In fact, it gets worse. In the case of our build and test system, it took more
than leadership pushing to sunset the offering; it took the die-hard believers

-- 427 of 630 --

leaving the team to really finish off the initiative. We share this as a
cautionary tale: when you staff up a team through passion about a particular
technology, those people are likely to leave if that technology doesn’t pan
out in the way they’d hoped.
Coordinating the Sunsetting
Once you’ve decided you should sunset a system, you have a few options to
consider as you plan how to execute it, most involving the coordination
approach you will take with the remaining users of the system:
Ask yourself whether you can give the system back to the consuming
team.
Occasionally, the burden of support is beyond what your team can
justify, but another team is so dependent on the system that they are
willing to take it back and operate it themselves. You may need to do
some negotiation here, because sometimes the other team’s
leadership will expect you to give them people to support it, and it’s
likely that you are cutting the offering because you don’t have people
to spare. In this instance, think about how you can train their team to
handle support, and create a transition timeline where your engineers
and their engineers pair on the system so they understand how to
work with it. You may still end up permanently moving a person or

-- 428 of 630 --

two to the other team, but if it frees up many others on your team to
focus on more important things, the trade may well be worth it.
Identify possible off-ramps.
When transferring the system’s operations to another team isn’t
possible and sunsetting is unavoidable, it’s time to prepare for hard
conversations with the remaining users. The best preparation is to
identify ways to soften the customer impact of losing the system and
having to move to something else. For example:
Can you document the steps needed to migrate to a different
system so they can understand the effort that migration might
take, and can you offer additional support through this migration?
Can you connect them with a customer who has gone through the
sunsetting already to share lessons learned?
Can you explain how they may use your platform to build their
own version of this offering, if it is a minor feature?
Can you show them how to get the same outcomes with a
different tool or feature set?
Talk to the users and explain their options, creating a timeline with their
input.

-- 429 of 630 --

If you’re sunsetting something, it should already have a limited
number of users, and talking to them (instead of just sending an
announcement notice) is a good idea to maintain your relationships.
Furthermore, while you might have an idea about the timeline for
sunsetting, be prepared to negotiate that in order to give your
stakeholders the chance to react. Sunsetting timelines can be as short
as quarters or as long as years, depending on the size of the user base
and the criticality of the system to that group.
This brings up another key point: you owe it to your users to give
them as much warning as possible that this is happening. It is true
that they are likely to ignore the problem if you tell them too far in
advance, but it’s better to give them a chance to do the work earlier.
The timeline will depend on the complexity of the feature and the
mitigation work they’ll need to do. Migration from one database type
to another can be as “easy” as running migration scripts, doing
performance regression testing, running in prod in parallel, and
finally flipping a switch, or it could mean having to read a bunch of
stored procedures and understand long-forgotten business logic,
rewriting it against a new database, and then doing all of those other
“easy” steps.
Don’t Be Afraid to Sunset When It Makes Sense

-- 430 of 630 --

It’s not fun to tell a stakeholder that you can’t support them anymore, but
it’s worse to degrade everyone else’s experience because your team is
spread too thin supporting one-off special-case offerings. So, don’t be afraid
to edit your offerings from time to time when you launch something that
goes almost nowhere. Doing the right thing for the overall company
sometimes means disappointing a few people in the process.
Wrapping Up
Migrations and sunsetting are two of the least fun things about owning a
platform. No one likes to make their customers do work just to stay in
place, and migrations often feel like a tax that customers have to pay for
using your systems. But this cost is the reason we see migrations as one of
the biggest opportunities for platform teams. This levy will come whether
the application teams use your platforms or a smattering of cloud, OSS, and
vendor systems. All of that underlying software has to be updated
occasionally, whether it’s bundled into a platform or not. The promise of
platform engineering is that we can minimize the cost of change for the
whole engineering organization through better automation, communication,
and execution. We aspire to be a stable foundation that makes the whole
organization more efficient as a result.
The common themes of this book are echoed in this chapter: think about
your users and their experience, and do as much as you can up front to

-- 431 of 630 --

make that experience better. Communicate thoughtfully, and often.
Challenge yourself to find places where software and automation can
replace manual or human-driven processes. Yes, sometimes you will need
to have hard conversations and disappoint your customers, such as when
you are sunsetting a system that they still rely on. But the more that you
have shown you are doing everything you can to make their experience
better, the easier these hard conversations will become.
Although the default, it could be turned off as necessary when running certain legacy systems that
lacked strong cloud native architectures.
We don’t expect that you will literally be able to write the migration documentation only once;
you’ll almost certainly discover edge cases that need to be added to it throughout the process. But
this is still much more one-off than the live documentation to support an evolving platform or
service, so the risk of it becoming out of date is minimal.
1
2

-- 432 of 630 --

Chapter 10. Managing Stakeholder
Relationships
Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty, this time. “If you tell
me what language ‘fiddle-de-dee’ is, I’ll tell you the French for it!”
she exclaimed triumphantly.
But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said, “Queens
never make bargains.”
“I wish Queens never asked questions,” Alice thought to herself.
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass, and What
Alice Found There, Chapter 9
Back in Chapter 5, we talked about how stakeholder management differs
from product management. Product management is about building the right
things for your customers; stakeholder management is about convincing
their leaders you made the right choices. Sometimes it doesn’t matter how
well you are delivering a rock-solid, customer-focused platform: if key
stakeholders don’t believe in your investments, you will be unsuccessful.
When your stakeholders don’t support you, a charismatic peer with a
compelling vision can bleed off valuable investment on the basis of a good
idea and a little execution, even when you know that the new platform can’t
come close to providing all of the features of your current offering.

-- 433 of 630 --

The painful truth of building internal-focused platforms is that slow delivery
and an indirect tie to business value means your stakeholders have an
outsized influence on your success. If you want to ensure that your team has
enough cover to build the platforms they need to build without getting
thrashed by other leadership or engineering teams, managing stakeholder
relationships is a must.
In this chapter we will discuss:
A mapping technique to help you determine which stakeholders need
your time
How best to communicate with stakeholders
Techniques for finding acceptable compromises, including on the
perennial but contentious topic of stakeholders building shadow
platforms
Handling one of the most extreme points of stakeholder contention—
justifying the size of your platform team
Your relationship with your stakeholders doesn’t need to be a zero-sum
game where you lose if they win. You want to be smart about how you
approach these relationships, but don’t forget that you are all playing for the
same larger team, and the goal is to win through the best business outcomes.

-- 434 of 630 --

IS STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT JUST UNNECESSARY POLITICS?

-- 435 of 630 --

Many think that stakeholder management is just a bunch of politics and
dealing with bad actors, and we used to agree. We’ve been a part of many
big decisions where only one side would get what they wanted, and we’ve
seen many peers seemingly advocate not for the needs of the business but
rather to grow their own careers and build their own empires. But we’ve
also seen peers that we admire accused of this self-interest, and even been
accused of it ourselves! Once we realized that there was more to this
conflict than the company hiring “jerks” that created “politics,” we got
curious about why this happens and how to handle it better.
What we now understand is that the problem is much more about
organization size than individuals. Remember Dunbar’s number? At
somewhere between 50 and 150 people, organizations split into mini-
organizations, with diverging practices, beliefs, and priorities. This means
that even with a strong company culture, you will inevitably find situations
where the right decision “for the business” from your perspective might not
be the right decision “for the business” from someone else’s. Stakeholder
management is how we make sure our peers have an appreciation of our
perspective and context so that when conflicts happen, they don’t just listen
to their own team’s complaints and blame us for everything.
While it’s frustrating when your customers act a bit like a clannish village,
it’s perfectly natural. It is also natural that when their “mayor” brings the
village’s biggest problems to your attention, they expect it to become your
biggest problem too. That’s just what happens in villages; we’d bet that
1

-- 436 of 630 --

when you are frustrated with teams or systems that you depend on, you
gossip to your peers to see if there’s a common pattern, and ask your mayor
(sorry, we mean manager) to help if so.
Stakeholder Mapping: The Power-
Interest Grid
To think about stakeholder management, you first have to understand your
stakeholders and how to measure their influence. To frame this
conversation, let’s introduce an imaginary platform engineering leader, Juan.
Juan is the VP of platform engineering, and his team is building all of the
common platforms and tools for every other engineering group. This means
that all three of the other major engineering teams that are building the
company’s big products are his stakeholders. He also builds a few offerings
that are used by some internal nontechnical teams, including finance and
HR, and works with both the CFO and the chief people officer as part of that
work. He reports to the CTO, and his team occasionally gets pulled in to
directly unblock a major product deliverable by the business product
leadership.
The current state of affairs is that Juan’s platform is working well enough
for the nontechnical internal employees and when they are pulled to unblock
major product deliverables they manage to do it, but they are disengaged

-- 437 of 630 --

from the major product engineering teams, who see them as a necessary
nuisance.
How should Juan decide where to focus his stakeholder engagement? Let’s
start the conversation by using a simple and well-established model called
the power-interest grid. We’ll identify the most important stakeholders by
mapping them to a four-quadrant grid, as shown in Figure 10-1. Our y-axis
is increasing power, and the x-axis is increasing interest.
Figure 10-1. Power-interest grid, showing the four quadrants of stakeholders based on their power
within the organization and interest in your work

-- 438 of 630 --

In the top-right quadrant, you have your high-power, highly interested
stakeholders. These are the people you want to spend a lot of time
understanding. Your powerful stakeholders are critical business leaders or
those who have the support of critical business leaders. What draws their
interest is the times when they not only rely on the platform in general, but
have either a direct product whose delivery depends on you or a team who
are unhappy with what you are delivering.
We emphasize the negative here because in our experience, most of these
stakeholders are very busy people who do not get deeply engaged with the
platform when things are going well and they believe it poses low risk to
their own teams’ success. If you make this group unhappy, you raise the risk
that they will build a shadow platform, or worse, that your team will get
broken up and absorbed by those engineering areas, to the detriment not
only of your team but also your career and the health of the technology
platform.
Let’s take a look at what this grid looks like for Juan (Figure 10-2).

-- 439 of 630 --

Figure 10-2. The power-interest grid showing Juan’s stakeholders
The top-right quadrant contains the chief product officer (CPO) and leaders
from the three other major engineering teams (in particular, the ones that
rely on his team most for their own product deliverables and the ones that
are most ambitious). Because his team is not yet seen as a value-add, the
minute the platform starts to struggle, it is likely that someone from this
group will make a play. Juan’s team is also in this quadrant, but lower on the
power axis than his peers. You may be surprised that we categorized them
this way, but prioritizing making your own engineering team happy over
your most powerful stakeholders is a tempting bargain that we have too
2

-- 440 of 630 --

often seen end in tears. Senior stakeholders can tell when they are being
treated with secondary importance to those they see as lower in the ranks
and will absolutely use that against you if anything goes wrong.
In the top-left quadrant are the high-power but lower-interest stakeholders.
These might include Juan’s boss, the CTO, who is content to let things play
out without either supporting or undermining him, and business leaders who
are busy with other things and don’t have time to get into the weeds of
Juan’s world (people who may move back into the top-right quadrant as new
initiatives arise). It also includes the CFO and chief people officer, who are
generally happy with Juan’s work but spend most of their time thinking
about things other than technology. Assuming they are really happy, this
quadrant is an opportunity for Juan, because nudging this group into more
engagement can improve his odds of surviving a battle with his ambitious
peers. However, he shouldn’t spend so much time on this group that he is
seen as wasting their attention on things that don’t directly concern them.
The lower-right quadrant is where Juan finds a lot of overlap with product
management, as this is where many of the actual engineering teams who use
the platform reside. They have to use this thing day in and day out, and
some of them will be very interested in the roadmap and features and how it
could be better. The product team does most of the stakeholder management
for this group.

-- 441 of 630 --

Finally, in the lower-left quadrant are people who rarely interact with Juan’s
team or their software. These folks will only vaguely know what the team
does, and they are likely to care only when something is going very wrong.
This mapping shows what we believe to be the political reality on the
ground. When you look at the platform team through the lens of building
great products, the engineers who use your platforms come out on top.
When you look at the platform team through the lens of Juan as an
engineering manager and leader, the team itself comes out on top. But when
you look at the team through the lens of stakeholder management, the most
important stakeholders are unlikely to be either those who use the platforms
directly or the team building the platform, but rather the senior people who
may judge the delivery harshly, potentially seeing your platforms as at best
an impediment to their ambitions and at worst a competitor.
As you build your own stakeholder map, some questions to ask yourself are:
Who has the ear of the most senior leadership?
Which teams are considered indispensable, and which are considered
nice to have? Where does my team sit on this spectrum?
If I did everything perfectly but a stakeholder still didn’t like me very
much, how much would it matter?
Which stakeholder groups are the loudest? Of these, which are the most
respected in the company?
If my team overdelivered for this stakeholder, would it matter?

-- 442 of 630 --

By thinking about your power-interest mapping, you can identify critical
groups to spend time with. More than this, you can start to understand what
they care about, and use that to shape not just your team’s plans, but also
how you will manage the relationships in terms of communication and
compromises, which are the subjects of the following sections.
Communicating with the Right
Transparency
Once you’ve mapped your stakeholders, it’s time to think about
communication with them. How much do you tell your stakeholders, when
do you tell them, and how do you tell it?
Beware of Oversharing Detail
The answer to the question of how much to tell your stakeholders is not as
obvious as you might hope. While it’s good to keep people informed of your
progress (using something like the Wins and Challenges updates described
in Chapter 7), too much transparency can cause just as many problems as
too little. The problems caused by oversharing include:
External micromanagement
Your team is accountable to your stakeholders, but that doesn’t mean
stakeholders are responsible for managing and prioritizing your day-

-- 443 of 630 --

to-day. Providing too much transparency encourages some
stakeholders to treat you like an execution arm that they control, so
this can be a good way to undermine your strategy and create
unnecessary second-guessing of the work your team is doing.
Tuning you out
Other stakeholders, when drowned by minutiae in your updates, are
instead going to start ignoring you. If everything is going well, that’s
fine, but when things aren’t going well this overload of information
contributes to a sense of mistrust from partners who may feel that you
are deliberately trying to distract them from the meaningful
information by sending them too much to parse.
Focusing on the wrong details
Stakeholders who are given too much information sometimes end up
focusing on things that really don’t matter to them. You can create
problems just by telling them things that they don’t understand but
that seem like things they should care about. For example, coming
back to the challenges with SLOs we talked about in Chapter 6, we
have seen stakeholders look at an SLO dashboard with 24 green
graphs and obsess that the platform team needed to get to the root
cause on the one that was slightly red, even though the engineering
team was comfortable that it was just a noisy measure.
Relationship damage

-- 444 of 630 --

We have seen highly technical platform leaders try to resolve
disagreements by providing the stakeholders with a bunch of
engineering details to support their case. Unless the stakeholders are
prepared to evaluate these details and motivated to understand this
level of nuance, they are likely to be left with the impression that the
leader isn’t trying to communicate with them or is just a bad
communicator in general.
For any broad messaging (including the Wins and Challenges process from
Chapter 7), focus hard on what message you want stakeholders to take away.
While you don’t want to compromise accuracy (this will make them lose
trust if they catch it), try to send that message without including extra detail.
If some stakeholders ask for specific details, you’ll know which ones are
important to them, and you’ll be able to tune the level of detail to that
individual case. For less technical stakeholders, that may mean convincing
someone more technical whom they trust, rather than trying to convince
them directly.

-- 445 of 630 --

THE STAKEHOLDER IS ALWAYS RIGHT
Stakeholders often seem to amplify the worst noise coming out of their own
teams. You may have had a small mishap that you handled well internally—
maybe an operational issue, maybe a missed release date. It was controlled
but still impactful enough that some customers started gossiping among
themselves. Now it’s “that platform team is a bad owner,” or “that platform

-- 446 of 630 --

team builds technology for the sake of building technology.” You go to the
customer team’s leader, your stakeholder, hoping to quiet the noise by
having a rational cost/benefits discussion. But rather than understanding,
they double down and start questioning not just your strategy but your
leadership choices. Then they say they “just want matters solved,” leaving
all the resolution work to you. And if you don’t solve those matters in the
way they expect, well, you’re the one who has broken trust—they made
their expectations clear!
This comes down to an old sales saying: “The customer is always right.”
Somehow we think that because our stakeholders are also engineering
leaders they should have a balanced perspective on our challenges. This
would be great, but unfortunately it’s rarely the case. Instead, when there are
problems between your team and a stakeholder’s team, you usually will see
some combination of the following:
Stakeholders who view you as their “internal vendor” and don’t believe
that you can appreciate what their jobs entail, especially because they
think you are the source of many of their problems. They are therefore
resistant to hearing ideas from you about what their own teams could be
doing better.
Stakeholders who believe they could do your job and manage your team
better than you can, even though the advice they give addresses only the
subset of your problems that impact them. (We admit, we have been
guilty of this same attitude from time to time.)

-- 447 of 630 --

Stakeholders who have forgotten about what you did for them yesterday,
or how much better the platform is now than it was a year ago. It’s
human nature to stop noticing the absence of problems, especially when
there are more improvements to be made or problems that haven’t been
addressed yet.
The sooner you accept that your customers will rarely be satisfied, that their
leaders will always bring you problems, and that your job as a platform
leader is to roll with it and keep moving forward, the happier you will be in
your role.
Use Regular 1:1s Judiciously
Incoming platform leaders should begin by conducting several 1:1s with
stakeholders to hear about their concerns with your platform, assess their
power and interest, and understand their needs and motivations. But beware
of relying on this technique indefinitely. While we encourage you to keep a
regular cadence of 1:1s with your critical stakeholders, we have three words
of warning:
They are time-consuming, linearly scaling with the number of
relationships. This means that as your platform grows, you will find
yourself without the time to build new relationships of the same depth;
equally, if you attempt to slow down the cadence with some stakeholders

-- 448 of 630 --

to make room for others, they may interpret this as you signaling their
unimportance.
When the relationship is not in a good place and the stakeholder is not of
mind to invest in it, they will likely view an unnecessary 1:1 as yet
another cost that your team is imposing on them.
The privacy of 1:1s is as much a weakness as a strength—-for instance,
when most stakeholders tell you in 1:1s that they’re happy with your
trade-offs, your unhappy stakeholders aren’t there to hear that. Telling the
unhappy stakeholders “I think my other stakeholders agree with my
decision” sounds whiny, even when it’s accurate.
It’s not realistic to rely solely on 1:1s to get feedback, share information,
and develop trusting relationships. Plenty of busy managers would rather
you just get things done, broadcast information more broadly, and save their
calendar for times when it is really important to talk in private. In the steady
state, we recommend a quarterly 1:1 with most of your “Keep
Satisfied/Keep Informed” stakeholders, and monthly 1:1s with your
“Manage Closely” stakeholders.
Track Expectations and Commitments
This is Communication 101 advice, but some new platform leaders get
tripped up by it because they are used to roles with fewer stakeholders and
fewer day-to-day surprises. A typical day in the life of a platform leader
might look like this:

-- 449 of 630 --

In a stakeholder 1:1, you commit to looking into something that’s
bothering the stakeholder’s teams.
Without writing down the specifics, you go straight into another meeting,
or more likely, a series of additional meetings.
You then get paged into an operational event, and the details of what you
were supposed to look into get forgotten, never to be acted on.
The stakeholder may not even raise the issue in the next 1:1 (they probably
didn’t track it either), but it’s sure to come to their mind at an inopportune
time. And now it will be seen as a missed commitment, contributing to their
difficulty in trusting you and your team.
If you are new to a leadership role in a platform team, don’t rely on your
memory just because it worked in the past—write down commitments in a
way that will help you remember to act on them. It’s not necessary to take
down minutes of all 1:1s in a common document; in fact, doing so can come
across as tracking stakeholders’ words in an act of political scorekeeping.
Instead, take notes privately, and ideally email the stakeholder with the exact
expectations, so they can clarify if they wish.
Scale Up with Interlock Meetings and Customer
Advisory Boards
Because 1:1s don’t scale, you’ll need to have broader meetings as well. One
of the most popular forms is the interlock meeting. In this meeting,

-- 450 of 630 --

representatives of the platform group meet with the stakeholders to discuss
work in progress and get feedback. These can be held biweekly, monthly, or
quarterly, depending on the stakeholder sensitivity. At the quarterly level,
we have also called them customer advisory boards (CABs).
Interlock meetings and CABs are often owned by the product management
team, but beware of leaving all of the communication to product (or
program/project) management leaders; when stakeholders are struggling due
to your team’s operational challenges or engineering delivery issues, the
best people to own this communication are the engineers who are operating
and delivering the platform. Product management should run the roadmap
and feature interlock discussion, but engineering needs to be there to speak
to other matters.
We can’t emphasize enough how important it is to prepare for these
meetings. Get clear on:
What you want to get out of the meeting
What information and decisions will be presented
How you’re going to let the participants have a voice but also keep the
conversation structured (an antipattern here is presenting a slide deck for
55 minutes, leaving 5 minutes for questions at the end)
When these meetings work best, they help your loudest critics understand
that they are actually in disagreement not only with you, but with what most
of your other stakeholders want. When they go poorly, it’s often because

-- 451 of 630 --

you are attempting to solicit opinions from stakeholders on decisions that
extend beyond their understanding of the trade-offs, so the meeting turns
into a battle over which teams’ needs are most important.
Increase Communication During Rough Patches
We’ll end the communication section with this final advice: when things are
going well, when the platform is stable, when stakeholders are getting what
they need, and when there is little budgetary pressure to scrutinize every
project, stakeholders are likely to be happy. You will need to communicate
what is happening, but in these cases, much of the stakeholder management
work can be subsumed by the product management team as part of their
general customer engagement. Keep your stakeholder meetings lightweight
and only as frequent as needed to maintain the relationships.
When things are not going well, whether due to operational instability,
features that aren’t being delivered, or a budget crunch that has everyone
questioning investments, you need to ramp up transparency and
communication until the rough patch has passed. In this case, make sure you
are bringing the right information, conveyed by the appropriate owners, to
your stakeholders, and supplementing any meetings with additional
email/chat updates as needed.
Finding Acceptable Compromises

-- 452 of 630 --

Even when you have done all the planning we laid out in Chapter 7 and are
communicating to stakeholders well, you’ll still need to deal with
disagreements and escalations from your stakeholders. In their view, being
closer to business revenue and growth must mean they understand what is
“right” for the business better than some internal-serving platform team.
You will have to address these issues thoughtfully, ensuring stakeholders
feel that their perspective is considered even when you think they’re being
unreasonable.
As our many stakeholder discussions have shown us, determining the truth
of “what platform work will be of highest value to the business” is generally
simply not feasible, as it involves different judgments regarding the
probable value of what will be built on top of it. Yes, you should attempt to
gather as much information as possible, including escalating up the
management chain to those with more global responsibility who might have
an overriding opinion. But you will often find that they demur, as there are
too many uncertainties for them to make a definitive call around a single
platform’s roadmap. Instead, they want you to compromise.
Maybe your stakeholders need something that you think you just can’t
support. Maybe they want you to reprioritize essential work in favor of a
new feature. Maybe they want you to cut costs so that they can recover
some budget. Whatever it is, you can’t deliver on it without impacting
something else you think is more valuable. What do you do?

-- 453 of 630 --

Be Clear About the Business Impact
When you are the one saying no to their request, the worst thing you can do
is lean on excuses when a stakeholder questions the value of your current
investments. If you want to get to a compromise, you have to do it in terms
that rise above the specifics of each case, which means you have to make
your case in terms of business impact.
Too often, platform leaders let themselves get sloppy about business impact.
Someone asked for a feature and the team jumped on it without asking
whether it was really important or not, resulting in a lot of work that didn’t
make much of a difference. The team spent too much of their time on
speculative investments that didn’t really help with current pain points, and
the application teams are tired of waiting for those investments to pay off.
Or, worst of all, everything just takes too much time and costs too much to
build. Even simple features take months to produce.
There’s always an excuse that you can find for these situations. The
platform is unstable and it’s hard to make changes, so new features take a
long time to implement. You’re convinced that the current system is
unscalable and you have to build a new system to future-proof the platform.
You’ve had some turnover, so the team is slower than they should be. Your
stakeholders keep changing their minds, and this further slows the delivery.
And on and on and on.

-- 454 of 630 --

At the point of saying no to a stakeholder request, it is critical that you don’t
just assume your roadmap is correct because you planned it to be correct.
You need to look at the current status and value of the work. How much of it
is dedicated to things that customers want now as a high priority, and how
much of it is invested in speculative work, future-proofing, or stability/debt
remediation? You have to balance immediate value with future-proofing,
and this may mean moving some people onto different projects in response
to your customers’ needs.
Even when you find yourself in the situation where the platform is so
unstable that you have to pause most of the customer-demand work in favor
of stability and remediation, you still owe it to your stakeholders to show
them the timeline, goals, and value of this work. You’re measuring
something to see whether the system is stable or not, right? Report on how
that is improving.
Your stakeholders should not need to accept your word about your business
impact. They should be able to see it.
Sometimes Say “Yes, with Compromises”
It’s common to work against a roadmap that, by virtue of trying to address
the biggest challenges, neglects little things that are important to smaller
customer groups. But just because a customer group is small doesn’t mean it
doesn’t have influence. Look at their position in your stakeholder map to see

-- 455 of 630 --

if they have an outsized influence. They might be the darling of an
important executive. They might be quick to complain and influential
drivers of broader customer opinion. They might be working on a high-
profile project that everyone is watching closely. Or maybe you just owe
them one because you keep having to deprioritize their requests.
Whatever the reason, it’s important to remain somewhat flexible and
responsive to these types of requests. Particularly when you’re asked to do
something that does not imply either a large up-front development
investment or a high ongoing support burden, you should try to flex to
support your high-profile customers to buy some political capital. You might
find it odd that we encourage this, given that we spent so much time talking
about sunsetting features that are rarely used in Chapter 9. And it’s true,
sometimes this ends up causing you to build a one-off that costs more than it
should to maintain and operate, and ultimately needs to be sunset.
But sometimes, a team knows what they need, and our job as platform
owners is to support them and provide the thing they can’t live without.
There are two extremes that you want to avoid as a platform owner:
Always saying “yes” and turning into a feature shop
The first is the reactionary extreme. Every request that comes in
causes you to jump and try to patch in some feature or offering as
quickly as possible. Your platform spirals into something that is
harder and harder to evolve and support, ending up like a

-- 456 of 630 --

Frankenstein’s monster of cobbled-together features with no
overarching goal. This is a sign that you are not comfortable saying
no to your stakeholders (and often, your team). It may also be a sign
that you don’t have a clear platform strategy, but not necessarily: all it
takes is a stronger urge to please in the moment than a dedication to
your vision to end up in this scenario.
Always saying “no” like you hold perfect judgment of company value
However, the other extreme, where you are totally inflexible and
build only what you think is right and aligned with your platform
strategy, is equally impossible. You should be working closely with
your customers, ultimately trying to deliver value to the overall
company and business. Unlike a third-party vendor, your job is not
just to build something people are willing to pay you for, but rather to
provide something important that’s flexible enough to be customized
specifically for the needs of the people in the company.
This is why some of the least effective platform leaders we have
managed were often the ones who had the strongest technical and
product vision for their platform. They mistakenly believed that this
vision gave them the necessary knowledge to make the right choices
for the business. This led them to refuse to compromise with
stakeholders who saw potential value differently, insisting on only
doing things aligned with their vision. They would argue that all the
problems with the current system were the result of compromises,

-- 457 of 630 --

and their job was not to let that happen to the new one, or to the
teams building it. As a result, when their teams hit any setbacks,
long-frustrated stakeholders were quick to point out that not only
were they impossible to work with, but they couldn’t even execute
well.
When an important customer needs a favor that you can offer with little
sacrifice, it’s worth it to say yes. But it’s also good to say yes when someone
brings you a feature request that should clearly be provided by your
platform, backed by a pressing business deliverable and evidence that this
feature is on the critical path for that business deliverable. In this case, don’t
fight with them over the unexpected request; instead, figure out what
compromises might be needed to get it done.
Look for compromises around the scope and timing of this new feature. Is
there a stripped-down offering that you can create faster that will unblock
their most valuable business needs? Or can they adjust their own timelines
to give you extra time to deliver while they concentrate on other parts of the
work? Once you’ve negotiated the minimal realistic “yes,” you may need to
make sure other stakeholders are aware of the priority changes and any
impacts this might have on them. But don’t be afraid to support a team just
because it wasn’t in your original plans.
Saying “No” Without Ruining the Relationship

-- 458 of 630 --

As with all stakeholder conversations, this one depends on the relationship
you have with the stakeholder, the positioning of your team, and the
magnitude of the request they are making. For the purposes of this section,
we assume that you can ultimately say no to this person, although doing so
may cost you some political points. If it’s a person you can’t say no to at all,
you need a different playbook; we recommend asking your manager for help
(and if they can’t say no either, then you need to reevaluate whether this is
really a case for a “yes, with compromises”).
For times when you can say no, consider these options:
Not yet, priority call
Are you saying no, or are you saying not yet? Sometimes the request
is for something that you think is valuable, that you want to do, but
that you can’t see a way to prioritize at this time. In this case, you
want to leave your stakeholder with clarity on when you might be
able to deliver it, as well as options they might have if they need it
sooner. This could mean you help guide them through implementing
this offering themselves, as something you can take back into your
platform team at a future moment. Offering someone from your team
to partner on the build can be a good idea, both to help them build it
faster and to ensure that you have some insights and input into the
design. Another option is to show them other priorities that have
come from other teams and outweighed their needs. For all you know,
they might be able to convince other stakeholders to wait behind

-- 459 of 630 --

them. It’s good to be open to options when you get requests for
features that you think you should implement, but you just can’t
justify implementing right now.
Not yet, technical call
A different version of “not yet” happens when you are not technically
ready to provide a feature. In this case, the partner team can’t do
anything to unblock you. You don’t have the underlying technical
pieces in place to support the request, so it’s not possible to start the
initiative. You may still want to partner with them, though, to see if
there are other workarounds that they could use until you are
prepared to build the piece they need. No matter what, take the time
to explain the technical blockers to them and do not back down if
your team cannot build what they want yet, because pretending that
you can will just damage your reputation and stability in the long
term.
No, product strategy call
Not everything makes sense to be inside your platform. Resist the
urge to become an empire builder who says yes to every feature that
might possibly go into your offering just because someone expressed
an interest. You need to understand the core mission of your product,
and not everything will fit into that core mission. Allowing mission
creep is likely to dilute the value of the product and make it harder to

-- 460 of 630 --

support and evolve over time. This will go over best if your platform
is built to allow the people making the requests to either work around
this gap or build their own self-managed extensions, or when you can
point them to a different system that might align with their feature
needs.
No, technical call
Similarly, some things aren’t technically feasible, and you have to
call that out. This is why we have former engineers in leadership
positions on platform teams: because they understand that not every
good idea can actually be built. Ian has many scars caused by poorly
designed networking and knows that the operational overhead of
network-based solutions means things that sound quick and simple to
implement can often be overwhelmingly difficult to operate. Camille
has similar scars caused by magical thinking about distributed shared
memory systems. Dreaming big is one thing, but unless you are
running a team that can prove they have a solid solution to an
unsolved problem, don’t be afraid to say no to things that are not
technically feasible—just do your best to explain to the engineers
why this is the case.
Going in with a hard no is never a fun conversation. Don’t make it about
your ego! Your stakeholders are not “stupid” because they don’t understand
the technical limitations or don’t see your product strategy as clearly as you
do. When you need to go in with a hard no, it helps to have a plan or

-- 461 of 630 --

recommendation for what else they can do, similar to your “not yet”
conversations. Should they talk to another team? Can they think about their
problem in a different way? Leaving them feeling like you care about their
problem even though you can’t help them is important for the future
relationship, so try to avoid shutting them down completely.
We asked contributor Jordan West how they handle balancing “no” with
“yes.” What follows is from Jordan.

-- 462 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 463 of 630 --

Finding the balance between “yes” and “no” was a challenge on a platform
team I joined that had formed after a reorg. Because the perception of the
prior team was that they couldn’t deliver, we started by greatly limiting what
we did—we said yes to delivering three things in the next 12 months, and
delivered them above and beyond expectations. Unfortunately, the next year
there were still plenty of complaints; but instead of being about lack of
delivery, now they were about the platform team saying no too much.
Our initial inclination was to keep saying no and so deliver fewer things on
faster timelines. But the feedback was overwhelming, so we ended up taking
a different approach: saying “yes, with compromises” to many more things
but greatly limiting the scope of each, so we could still deliver.
Two examples of this were:
We committed to add graph storage as an offering, but to only support
small and medium use cases in the first release, excluding anything in the
“hot” path that could bring our website down. We also communicated
that in the next round of planning we would circle back and see if there
was still an appetite for a larger-scale solution.
We committed to adding a scaled-down “versioned datasets” feature—a
fancy name for “taking data from the data warehouse and putting it in
OLTP databases.” Long term, we wanted to support incremental updates
of the data, but for the first year we only committed to the data
movement portion for a static dataset.

-- 464 of 630 --

In both cases, we covered a good portion of the use cases to keep early
adopters happy, and also satisfied those who wanted the full feature set
because we proposed a plan and timeline for the rest. The result of this
incremental delivery that allowed us to say yes to more things was the team
was perceived a lot more positively.
Compromising on Shadow Platforms
Some of the worst stakeholder relationships stem from the building of
“shadow platforms.” As we’ve described in previous chapters, a shadow
platform is a system that duplicates the function of a current platform, often
using different underlying OSS and vendor technologies, with a slightly
different feature set and/or system (cost, performance, reliability) profile.
In an ideal world, these differences would be identified up front and the
current platform would expand its capabilities to handle the new use case.
Instead, the stakeholder’s team uses its own initiative and builds (or
proposes to build) something new—similar, but different. This is often
infuriating to the platform team’s engineers, who want to prevent this
“wrong thing” from happening and quickly escalate it to management.
Before you can figure out an acceptable compromise or “right” action, you
first need to identify what’s driving these teams to build shadow platforms.
Common reasons include:

-- 465 of 630 --

Can’t wait, won’t wait
Sometimes the product team has a burning need, and they cannot get
on the schedule of the platform team to get this need met. It’s true
that this may be a false urgency, and the decision by the product team
to build this new solution may be driven by the naive view that
throwing together a new platform or supporting a new piece of
infrastructure is easy and cheap, but there are also legitimately times
when a business has a tight window of opportunity to capture some
value and they need something that doesn’t exist yet in the platform
and can’t be added quickly. We can’t always fault the application
teams for building their own platforms under this kind of pressure,
even though it causes the platform team pain later on.
Novel demand
There will be times when an application team needs something that
might fit in with the platform offerings, but is not yet on the radar for
anyone else. This could happen because there is an opportunity that
requires a significantly different technology capability than the rest of
the company; for example, if a team needs a graph database offering
to spin up a brand-new business. You don’t want to support this
because no other teams are asking for it, so they go off and create it
for themselves.
Don’t want to collaborate

-- 466 of 630 --

A different situation occurs when the application team has a poor
relationship with the platform team and doesn’t want to deal with the
challenges of collaborating with them. This may come down to
impatience; after all, coordination takes time even in small
companies, let alone large ones. But often the application teams have
had bad experiences with the platform organization in the past,
perhaps due to an “us versus them” culture that has popped up on one
or both sides of the fence. We have all experienced the conflict
avoidance of engineers, and know that sometimes people prefer to
just go off and do things on their own rather than have to negotiate
with another team—especially when there is some outstanding
animosity or even just ambivalence about the experience of working
together.
Don’t appreciate the operator cost behind your “no”
Sometimes a team hears a no from you on something and decides
they want to build it anyway, even though you’re sure that the
operational cost is going to be far more than they bargained for. Their
second-guessing can be frustrating, especially when you know that
this is likely to boomerang into something you have to support.
Engineers just want to build
Finally, sometimes it’s just a case of engineers wanting to build stuff.
Application teams inevitably have some engineers who would rather

-- 467 of 630 --

build new systems than add incremental features to products. Some
companies even encourage this behavior by making it hard for
engineers to get promoted without building new systems, so there’s
an incentive to invent big problems to solve instead of collaborating
with a platform team to add a few features. This is always going to be
a factor in the development of shadow platforms, and engineering
leaders must pay attention to the incentives they set up for their teams
in order to keep this habit in check.
So, given what we know about the drivers that lead to the creation of
shadow platforms, what should you do about them? Here are a few
suggestions:
Break down the silos
There is no easy answer to solving the problem of an us versus them
culture. We discussed this in Chapter 5, but the more you can do to
clean up this thinking in your own team and by engaging with the
leadership of other teams, the better. This will help you get earlier
insight into what their needs are, incline them to consult you as a
trusted advisor before they start building on their own, and make it
less likely that you will be surprised by shadow infrastructure that
you never knew was being built.
Partner on urgent issues

-- 468 of 630 --

Remember that technology innovation necessarily means getting
away from existing solutions, which means that teams will sometimes
go off your platform to support their need for innovation. That
innovation may only ever be needed in their small area, or it may end
up back in your platform someday, powering more parts of the
business. If it seems like a genuine need that isn’t covered by your
platform, it may be best to let them run with it—you might not have
the bandwidth to address an urgent product engineering demand for a
new platform offering, and even if the team did the right thing by
coming to you first, there may be no way for you to reprioritize your
current work (or hire additional headcount) to help them.
In this case, we encourage you to refer to the strategies in Chapter 5
for finding new products, and try to partner with the team to help
with the build and understand what is being created. This gives you a
chance to keep an eye on things and learn whether this urgent demand
is something you might want to assimilate into your offerings later, or
whether the thing being built is strategic only for the team in
question. If it’s the latter, you can set clear boundaries early about
whether your team will eventually take over support and operations
for the platform in question.
Be patient and accept that sometimes you will play cleanup crew
Sometimes a team is going to build something no matter what, and
the best thing you can do is watch and wait. It can be infuriating to

-- 469 of 630 --

see engineering time wasted as it’s being built, or dealing with the
operational mess it will make in years to come. Nevertheless, it is
worth coaching yourself (and your team) to be humble and realistic
about what you do and don’t know, and mindful that sometimes what
you can intuit will be clear to your stakeholders only after they see
the results of their build.
Sometimes you will be surprised by what the shadow team can pull
off, particularly if they have a more “pioneering” mindset (as we
discussed in Chapter 8). An idea that you thought was impossible
might turn out to be just barely doable, and bring a lot of value to the
users despite the operational challenges. At the very least, there is
value in that the application team stakeholders are learning exactly
what it means to operate a scrappy platform, and so will better
understand your own problems.
Yes, sometimes this means you end up having to take over their
barely working system, playing the cleanup crew that turns it into a
platform-quality offering. But there are a lot of good ideas that come
from people close to a problem. Your team will sometimes be the
recipient of good ideas, questionably implemented; embrace the
cleanup as an opportunity when it comes.

-- 470 of 630 --

Money Troubles: Cost and Budget
Management
One of the most painful moments for platform teams comes in a downturn
(whether for the whole economy, or just the company you are working for),
when someone starts asking questions about whether your team should
really exist, what you are working on, and whether you are really adding
enough value. The more your stakeholders trust you and understand your
team and their accomplishments, the better you will fare. Unfortunately, it’s
also likely that even if you have done a good job with your powerful and
interested stakeholders, the powerful but disinterested ones will suddenly
express interest proportional to how much they think the “platform” budget
is not creating commensurate value for their part of the business. In this
scenario, you will face two very difficult challenges:
Roadmaps don’t matter
You might think you can avoid this with your bottom-up plan, which
we described in Chapter 7, but the truth is that while your KTLO
estimation will be valuable, everything beyond that will be viewed as
irrelevant plans made when times were good. In tough times every
team ends up rejustifying its size and roadmap, and business-aligned
application engineering teams are not given a pass on this pain any
more than platform teams are.

-- 471 of 630 --

Metrics don’t help
The next thing you may reach for is metrics. The problem is that
platform teams at best have loose metrics that align themselves to
outcomes. In Chapter 5, we discussed developing product metrics to
measure the impact of your work, and in Chapter 6 we discussed
some of the operational metrics you might provide to ensure your
health. But even if you do all of this well, you may have only second-
order metrics to show the value of your work and its impact,
particularly against business initiatives. Few care much about
developer productivity when the company is trying to survive.
Reliability of course matters, but you will be asked why a smaller
team building fewer features cannot do better. Even efficiency
projects rarely matter, unless you can save a significant amount of
money quickly.
If you find yourself in this situation, you need to do everything you can to
tie your work much more directly to the success of protected business
outcomes. Whether it is enabling someone’s pet project, making the
engineering lead of the flagship product team happy, or successfully selling
a story about the unacceptable risks that will happen if you don’t invest in
your platform, now is the time to double down on aligning yourself with
business outcomes.
How should you approach this? We recommend a three-step process,
outlined in the following sections.

-- 472 of 630 --

Step 1: Figure Out Who Will Benefit Tomorrow
Start by going through all of the work you’re doing that is not in the KTLO
category, and for each major project, ask which customers want it and what
the value is. For those projects that are closely coupled to delivering some
high-profile product or business initiative, you’re good. If anything, you
want to talk those projects up even more. Is there some small, loosely
related work that you think is important that you could bucket with those
initiatives without too much scrutiny? You can save a small amount of
discretionary budget by aligning it with these important mandates. You’ll
probably also end up building more valuable things in the process by
ensuring that your teams are getting creative about how to tie their work to
the highest-value customers.
In the process of doing this, you’re going to find some projects that don’t
easily line up with any big business cases, and this is where things get
painful. You may be right that experimenting with a new scheduling
algorithm can, over time, improve the performance and cost profile of your
machine learning platform, but right now that seems like a distraction from
the business of surviving. You have a few choices in these scenarios:
Pause the project
If the project was early, unclear, and had too many people working on
it, you should probably pause the initiative completely. Now is not
the time to maintain expensive speculative work.

-- 473 of 630 --

Shrink the project
Shrink it and fold it into something that everyone agrees is important.
As mentioned previously, you will need to buy yourself some
breathing room, and aligning speculative work with necessary work
is a good tactic for this.
Do the work to show business value
This means making a case for how this project could benefit the
business, getting stakeholders aligned, and accelerating the roadmap
to value creation. You may want to go so far as to get a specific
important stakeholder signed up as a senior sponsor for the project. If
your team feels strongly about the project’s value, you should give
them a chance to sell it—cutting it will likely be very demotivating,
and this is a great opportunity to teach them how to sell their ideas to
skeptical stakeholders.
Step 2: Group the Work into Teams (Don’t Go
Person-by-Person)
Unless your team is very small, you do not want to report on which
individuals are doing what work. Offering up this detail invites pointless
scrutiny, and you are pretending to have accuracy you probably can’t
deliver.

-- 474 of 630 --

Instead, group the work into chunks that are no smaller than a single project
team (say, 3–5 people at the smallest) can handle, and no bigger than a
double-sized team (up to 10–12) can manage. This is a reasonable approach
for teams of up to a couple hundred engineers. If you run a bigger
organization, make sure someone is grouping all project work into similar-
sized chunks across all the teams.
Grouping work by project-sized teams like this prevents you from the
mistake of saying you can trim every area evenly and have things continue
as normal. Your teams should not be uniformly overstaffed by some
percentage, so when you need to do justifications (or worse, cuts), your goal
should be to determine whole initiatives to cut so that you can spare other
initiatives and retain their focus.
Step 3: Come with Suggestions of What to Cut and
Strong Opinions About What to Keep
People respond to strength and weakness. If you try to defend every single
thing your team is working on and justify why you can’t possibly cut
anything, you will signal to your stakeholders that you aren’t taking this
situation seriously and aren’t listening to the message that you need to make
changes. It is important, however, that you make the case for why the most
important work matters, particularly if it is a speculative investment or
deeply technical.

-- 475 of 630 --

Having coached many teams through budget downcycles, we recommend
that you preemptively decide what you think should be reduced or
eliminated and come to the table ready to make those suggestions. This
should be informed by customer and stakeholder feedback (if no one
understands why you’re doing something and you can’t explain it yourself,
that’s a red flag), but it shouldn’t be entirely decided by their feedback. You
are the expert and owner of this area—show that expertise and ownership by
defending the things that others don’t understand or appreciate but that you
strongly believe are essential.
At the end of this exercise, you may have cut your team more than you
want, but by strategizing ahead of time you should be able to preserve your
most important investments (barring an unavoidable mandate to do a
massive 40–50% cut). Strong stakeholder relationships coming into this
exercise will minimize the pain; there’s no escaping the cuts, but the trust
you’ve established should give you the power to shape them in the way you
think is best.
Wrapping Up
In our experience, platform teams live and die on their success at
stakeholder relationship management, and we can’t overemphasize how
valuable it is to develop good practices throughout your team. You need to
understand how your stakeholders relate to your team, what they care about,

-- 476 of 630 --

and how to communicate and negotiate effectively with them. This doesn’t
always come naturally to engineers, in particular, but you can’t just delegate
it to product management and hope it will take care of itself. Your
stakeholders can make your life easier or harder, and it’s up to you to
manage those relationships for the good of your team, the platform, and the
company as a whole.
When developing these relationships, think about the different touchpoints.
Yes, you’ll have 1:1s, but you’ll also have interlocks and advisory meetings
where you give your stakeholders a chance to hear from you and one
another, to improve overall alignment. Increase communication, especially
in tough times, to maintain the right level of trust and transparency.
The day-to-day reality of stakeholder relationships kicks in whenever you
need to negotiate and compromise. It’s crucial to stay flexible and
responsive, even when plans seem to change out of the blue. Say yes when
it’s easy, and say yes when the request has clear, pressing business value.
Sometimes you’ll need to say no, or not yet, and accept that the application
team might build their own shadow platform. Always aim for the win/win:
if you can even just provide advice on their platform, it sets you up to learn
from what they build and possibly even take over the platform in the future
if it becomes successful.
Finally, there’s the issue of budgets. When money is tight, everyone is
looking for corners to cut, and without good stakeholder relationships your

-- 477 of 630 --

platform team might end up first on the chopping block. Get ahead of this
by figuring out for yourself which areas could be cut, and which areas are
must-dos. The more you show that you are invested in taking budget cuts
seriously, the more likely you are to end up with an outcome you can live
with. If you’ve done all of the other work in this chapter and come in with
strong relationships already established, you’ll ward off the worst outcomes
and live to fight another day.
Dunbar’s number is tied to the notion of community stability from back when humans were hunter-
gatherers. There is some debate over the number—somewhere between 50 and 150 people—but the
idea is that human brains are limited in how many relationships they can handle (e.g., in the sense of
remembering the personal details that matter).
Juan’s team is a stakeholder of variable power. Sometimes, Juan may have the power (and mandate)
to replace a large part of that team as needed; sometimes, the team’s opinion of Juan may mean as
much to the company as Juan’s opinion of his team!
1
2

-- 478 of 630 --

Part III. What Does Success Look Like?
“Well, in our country,” said Alice, still panting a little, “you’d
generally get to somewhere else—if you run very fast for a long time,
as we’ve been doing.”
“A slow sort of country!” said the Queen. “Now, here, you see, it
takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place. If you
want to get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as
that!”
—Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass, and What
Alice Found There, Chapter 2
A platform team running as hard as it can can often appear to be making
little progress. You get some systems into a steady state, enabling your team
to focus on other areas, only to be pulled back a year or two later when the
systems are outdated and no longer serve the company. Your paved paths
that make the 80% happy still leave the other 20% grumbling that their
needs haven’t been addressed. You hire the perfect balanced team, only to
go through a budget crunch that forces you to lay off some, or a growth
cycle that sees great people leave for greener pastures. On top of this, even
when you are progressing, delivering value is slow; it takes time to build a
high-quality product, time to convince customers to use it, and time to
migrate everyone.

-- 479 of 630 --

This is why we oppose textbook “metrics and measures” approaches as the
primary way of talking about platform engineering success. That’s not to
say they are useless; we will cover adoption and customer satisfaction
metrics in this part of the book, and we recommend the CNCF platform
engineering maturity model as a way of benchmarking your team and
looking for ways to improve. But these metrics and models are most useful
as broad signals that measure past actions, too simplistic and lagging to
capture the full picture of your situation and point you toward your next
successful investments.
Thus, we recommend a holistic approach to evaluating ongoing success by
focusing on four areas that will tell you whether you are on the best path:
Your platforms are aligned.
Your platforms are trusted.
Your platforms manage complexity.
Your platforms are loved.
Success as a platform engineering leader requires you to continually
evaluate how you are doing in each of these areas, to which the following
four chapters are dedicated. Sometimes changes underfoot mean you will be
failing, and often in correcting you will face trade-offs. But if you adjust
direction when the balance is not right, and are patient in waiting for your
journey on a calibrated path to start showing results, you will get your
platform to where the company needs it to be.

-- 480 of 630 --

Chapter 11. Your Platforms Are Aligned
The purpose of a team is not goal attainment but goal alignment.
When the team is fulfilling its purpose, team members are more
effective because they’re more directed.
—Tom DeMarco and Tim Lister, Peopleware:
Productive Projects and Teams
Alignment is the first criterion for holistically evaluating the success of
your platform engineering teams. This requires looking across all the
platform teams and asking: are we aligned in what we are doing?
Misaligned platform teams create a swamp of a different kind than the
“over-general” one we described in Chapter 1. This swamp is filled with
overlapping and incompatible products, tricky to use together and often at
odds with each other’s goals. It’s just as hard to navigate and can be even
more frustrating, as customers struggle with platform teams who can’t see
beyond the silos of their own making.
Here are the three areas in which we commonly see misalignments:
Purpose
Platform teams that do not have a holistic mindset (using a product
approach to develop software-based abstractions that are foundations

-- 481 of 630 --

for the business and serve a broad customer base) but rather operate
with a narrower focus are misaligned in purpose.
Product strategy
Platform teams that operate in silos, building platforms that are good
for their specific purpose but needlessly duplicate others or make
cross-platform use cases hard, are misaligned on product strategy.
Planning
Platform teams that do not support each other as they execute their
most critical projects, but rather get in each other’s way and
miscommunicate with customers about timelines and changed
circumstances, are misaligned on plans.
In this chapter we will dive into each of these types of misalignment and
talk about how you can successfully manage them.

-- 482 of 630 --

A SUCCESS RED HERRING: ADOPTION METRICS
When platform teams ask themselves, “What does success look like?” the
first answer is often some sort of adoption metric. Strong adoption should
indicate a platform team that is delivering value for the company by
building platforms customers are eager to adopt. However, this line of
thinking can be taken too far.
Focusing on adoption, platform teams can start to assume their sole mission
is to determine the platforms of the future, drive the usage of those to
100%, and deprecate everything else as fast as possible. But 100% adoption
only truly measures success when your customers have a choice of whether
or not to use your platforms. The risk of using adoption metrics when you
are targeting a captive or nearly captive audience is forgetting to build what
people want, and instead building what you think they should want and then
forcing them to use it.
Adoption is a better success metric than completion, the ultimate cop-out
metric that merely tracks your ability to declare victory, but that’s not
saying much. When adoption is measured system by system (or even
feature by feature), it works against the goal of alignment by creating
competition between your teams for user attention. If the platform team also
forces mandatory migrations in order to achieve adoption goals, the metric
loses all of its value in measuring organic customer demand and turns into a
stick to use on the customers. In the worst-case scenario, you have a

-- 483 of 630 --

confusing array of platform offerings and a constant pressure on customers
to justify their lack of adoption under the threat of mandatory migration.
This matters because you dilute your leverage every time your platform
team generates work for its customers. When the platform team makes the
customers responsible for driving their own adoption, whether by expecting
customers to write their own requirements or forcing them to migrate to the
newest product, they drain the very productivity they’re supposed to be
safeguarding. When the platform team is out of alignment and competes
with itself for customer attention by delivering offerings that don’t work
well together, it contributes to the complexity and confusion that it’s
supposed to be solving for.
So, be careful about using adoption as anything other than a secondary
metric. Instead, think about how you are delivering leverage by
understanding who will benefit most from your platform, and targeting the
adoption of those most valuable customers by working with them to
identify measurable pain points that your new platform will address.
You don’t need to get every single team onboard for every single product
you offer. That may be the goal for certain very targeted types of systems—
you probably don’t want multiple employee identity systems internally, for
example—but some platforms are simply more valuable for certain groups
than others, and trying to force every team onto the same platform can often

-- 484 of 630 --

cause you to lose sight of where you could be providing the most leverage
for the company.
Track adoption, and use it as an input to your product strategy. But don’t
mistake it for an absolute measure of success.
Alignment to Purpose
One example we’ve seen of misalignment to purpose was with a continuous
integration (CI) platform whose running tasks were regularly disrupted by
the underlying operating system platform running OS updates. This would
cause the CI task to restart, increasing tail latencies for CI users. It might
have seemed that the easy fix would be to delay the OS updates until no
tasks were running, but that implementation would have been an additional
hack on the already hacky legacy operating system platform. Instead, the
OS platform team pushed for the CI platform team to prioritize a migration
to a new OS platform with immutable images. While both sides agreed this
was the ideal engineering goal, the problem was that this project would take
many developer months to implement, and in the meantime the OS team
refused to implement a much smaller workaround that would have fixed the
user impact immediately.
When we dug into why there was such a strong disagreement here, it
became clear that the OS platform team’s leadership was not yet aligned on

-- 485 of 630 --

thinking of it as a platform engineering team. Instead, they still held an
“infrastructure” mindset. They were in conflict with partners because they
viewed their goal as prioritizing the technical quality of the solution above
all else. Rather than optimizing for the end customer experience, they used
unhappy customers as leverage to get their desired migrations done faster so
that their technology would be improved. In short, the OS platform team
failed to appreciate the product side of their decisions.
For platform teams to be successful, they must share a common purpose.
This comes back to the pillars of platform engineering we described back in
Chapter 2:
Product
Taking a curated product approach
Development
Developing software-based abstractions
Breadth
Serving a broad base of application developers
Operations
Operating as foundations for the business

-- 486 of 630 --

Each platform team will also define their purpose beyond this, specific to
their platform area. However, these four pillars are crucial for all platform
teams to adopt, because together they create leverage and make it possible
to manage the complexity that comes with building on OSS and cloud
primitives and interoperating with other platforms. You need to build a team
and team culture aligned to this.
Align Teams to Purpose with the Right Mix of
People
Alignment to purpose starts with getting the right people on the team, as we
discussed in Chapter 4. As you bring teams together and begin to hire new
people, openly discuss the balance of roles and skill sets that you’re looking
for across the team to help everyone understand what the new group needs
to look like. In a smaller company, everyone should be involved in the
hiring processes, as this reinforces agreement on the type of engineers that
platform engineering needs.
Driving people alignment in a larger organization is trickier: you can use
cross-team interviewing to support cultural intermixing, but you’ll likely
end up reorganizing some of the existing teams to make sure you have the
right people, with the right skill sets, covering the right product areas. If
you’re transforming an infrastructure team, you probably have many
functionally aligned subteams (think compute, networking, storage, etc.). In
the places where these teams overlap, you may want to mix things up, or

-- 487 of 630 --

even pull out separate teams that are more cross-functional to better support
platform initiatives.
Align Culture to Purpose with Common Practices
The next step of aligning to purpose is culture. The first part of this is teams
sharing common practices around our four pillars. Through a product
management culture of approaching your internal users as customers (not
just stakeholders) and looking for partnership opportunities with these
customers to identify new products, you break out of the “us versus them”
mentality and develop the empathy necessary to build great platform
products. Similarly, common operations practices, including operability
reviews, blameless postmortems, and other practices learned from the
DevOps and SRE movements, help break down the boundaries between
teams and platforms.
Align Culture to Purpose by Having Teams
Collaborate
The approach to collaboration determines much of your team culture, and
the more the organization collaborates, the more gelled its overall culture
will become. If you are reading this book as a senior leader overseeing
multiple platform areas, it is your job to bring your teams together
frequently and foster collaboration. For example, everyone within your

-- 488 of 630 --

organization should use one another’s platforms. Not only will this create a
common culture, but this “dogfooding” will also generate many of your
more creative ideas around product strategy.
If you’re an engineering manager, senior individual contributor (IC), or
product manager, you can contribute to this collaborative culture by looking
for chances to work with your peers on other teams and encouraging your
teams to pick their heads up from time to time to get a look at the bigger
picture of what’s going on around them. One approach to this is holding
architecture and product strategy reviews, and inviting members of other
platform teams to learn about and provide constructive feedback on these
strategies. Sharing work to drive collaboration is the core source of those
creative ideas, after all.
Alignment of Product Strategy
The next element of misalignment to address is product strategy. We
experienced this coming out of a period of rapid headcount growth with no
attempt to align across platform teams. Four teams made four different
technology bets for the new platform, each partnering with different
customers as early adopters. Roll forward a couple of years to our arrival,
and the result was five different compute platforms, where the largest one
was “deprecated” for new use cases but the other four were “not GA-ready
yet”—a clear failure of product strategy.

-- 489 of 630 --

However, the failures did not stop there. As each of the four new teams was
trying to grow their platform beyond a “scrappy” architecture, they realized
they could only do so with more engineers, which they could each justify
only by trying to capture the same set of use cases. As we discussed in
Chapter 3, duplication of common functionality is not always a problem.
But if you get to the point where platforms are not just duplicating but
actively fighting for the same customers to justify headcount, then
collectively you don’t have a product strategy.
To align product strategy across platforms, we recommend four tactics,
which we detail next.
Foster Cross-Platform Thinking with Independent
Product Management
If your product managers report to the engineering managers who own
specific platform areas, then your product managers will struggle to think
strategically outside those areas. They become an extension of the
engineering managers and lead engineers, and spend the majority of their
time communicating and planning within their respective engineering silos.
This narrow focus optimizes for growing and expanding within the
engineering functional domain, but it misses product improvements that
cross areas.

-- 490 of 630 --

As we discussed in the previous section, culture matters for alignment, and
can be used to push siloed product managers to be more open to
cooperation. However, there is always going to be conflict between each
platform area’s preferred strategies, and you make it hard on product
managers when the engineering manager doing their performance review is
deeply invested in just one.
To counteract this, keep the product management reporting structure
separated enough from the engineering management structure that they can
operate independently. We like to have all of the platform product managers
in a separate team reporting to a product management leader, in turn
reporting to a cross-area senior platform engineering leader. That way, the
leader of product management for platforms can be held accountable for the
platforms working well together as products.
When this works best, the product management leader understands that
their role is much less about dictating a singular unifying vision (i.e., the
Steve Jobs “visionary” version of product leadership), and more about
challenging their product management team to cooperate as they build out
their plans (called an “affiliative” or “collaborative” leadership style).
Foster Cross-Platform Architecture with
Independent Lead ICs
1

-- 491 of 630 --

Sometimes it’s actually engineering architecture misalignment that is
behind a product strategy misalignment. We lived through a version of this
with a deployment platform that was struggling with the storage throughput
requirements of large container images and scaling container deployments.
True, we had a storage platform that could have supported this with some
work, but the team members were fully occupied with their own customer
problems and so declined to get involved when first approached. Instead of
escalating the issue, the deployment platform team went deep into
prototyping a storage system rearchitecture to handle more scale. Since this
was seen as a technical decision, the product managers weren’t involved,
and the engineering managers were happy to have a fun technical project
for the team, despite this being a clear misalignment of technical ownership
and expertise. It was only after significant investment and delivery
challenges that the issue was brought to the attention of senior leadership,
and the storage team was brought in to eventually take over the system they
should have owned in the first place.
To avoid this kind of situation, you need some person(s) in the engineering
team who are not just thinking about cross-platform architectural problems,
but are in a position to advocate for resolving them. While we don’t like the
full bureaucracy of an architecture review board, it is useful to have the
most senior “principal/distinguished” engineer in the platform engineering
organization report to the same senior leader as the product management
leader. While this engineer should endeavor to stay somewhat hands-on to

-- 492 of 630 --

be grounded in their decision making, the other half of their role should be
helping with architecture-level misalignment—for example:
Providing escalation and advocacy when junior engineers are trying to
reduce architectural misalignment but running into product/engineering
management impediments
Looking for when teams are wrongfully duplicating architecture because
it’s easier (or more fun) than cooperating
For larger organizations, overseeing architecture/engineering design
sessions across teams to enable cross-vetting of major decisions and
knowledge sharing of best practices
Such a role should include talking more with customers about architecture-
impacting product decisions as well. But beware of having every big
engineering decision flow through a single person’s approval—not only will
they be a bottleneck, but it will also limit their ability to do the occasional
hands-on work. With this in mind, to scale up the role as the organization
grows, “staff-level” engineers should start taking on this role for their own
platform areas but be challenged by the principal engineer to think about
and advocate for platforms beyond their own.
Seek Feedback from Comments in Platform-wide
Customer Surveys

-- 493 of 630 --

With independent product management, you should now have product
managers who can be challenged to think outside their silos when they
build their strategies. However, particularly for large platforms, such
strategy conversations usually take place with a subset of users—often the
more senior ones, who may have become accustomed to the platform’s
flaws and don’t see the alignment issues that frustrate newer users. To
correct for this, we like to augment direct product management feedback
activities with data from the free-form comments of platform-wide
customer surveys.
Customer surveys won’t find all problems, but when feature-level product
misalignment is keeping them from getting their jobs done, this is often the
only outlet customers will use to tell you about it. We’ve found that it’s
almost always valuable to spend time investigating reported problems to see
how bad the situation really is and how pervasive one person’s frustration is
across the customer base. One comment is, of course, just a sample, but
often where there is smoke (coming out of someone’s ears), there is a
smoldering fire of other users with similar frustrations.
Judiciously Resolve Misalignment with
Restructuring
One alignment challenge comes when different teams have platform
offerings that provide overlapping feature sets. This often happens with
scrappy platforms created through partnerships with application teams, and

-- 494 of 630 --

the overlap can be substantial enough that there are more shared features
than unique ones. This leads to both product and engineering concerns.
From the product side, is this duplication confusing to users? What would
be the downside of limiting the duplication? From the engineering side, is
this duplication wasting engineering effort or driving additional costs?
Both sides can make bad choices here. Product managers, eager to
concentrate ownership in their product scope, may argue to create
consolidation even when that means losing valuable unique features from
one of the overlapping options. Engineering leaders, who also desire to
grow their teams, will similarly argue that the cost efficiencies of
unification outweigh the marginal benefits of the missing offerings. The
temptation to solve this problem by reorganizing the team and putting all
products under one leader is very strong.
It’s important to remember the lessons of Chapters 8 and 9: rearchitecting,
migrating, and sunsetting will take a lot of work, a lot of time, and a decent
amount of iteration along the way. A reorganization will not change that
(even if it is the right long-term move). Worse, reorgs cause churn in the
engineering teams and confuse customers on issues like where to go for
documentation and support. Yes, an organization’s structure shapes the
systems it produces, and leaders should keep an eye out for major structural
issues. But alignment-driven reorganizations should be reserved for
situations where the costs of misalignment are high and the benefits are
clear.

-- 495 of 630 --

In fact, our reorganizations have been driven more by the capacity of strong
leaders to take on more scope (or, conversely, by leaders who could not
handle their current scope) than by the goal of mapping our ideal product
portfolio onto the structure of our engineering organization. Going back to
our earlier example with the five compute platforms, that was something
that we resolved incrementally over 18 months, as each integration helped
us understand our strategy. In the meantime, we asked each platform team’s
leader to be aware of when they were competing for customer use cases,
and to work with their peers to determine how their product strategies were
different and so avoid the competition. Seeing how some of these leaders
were able to use influence to resolve these differences with peers, and so go
beyond dictating a solution to those under their authority, was in fact a large
part of how we learned who the strong leaders were.
Alignment of Plans
For an example of planning misalignment, let’s return to the OS platform
team we mentioned earlier. While yes, their attempt at a forced migration to
immutable images was causing issues for the CI platform, they were also
experiencing the challenge of working with a build-tools platform team that
hadn’t planned to do their work on the immutable images project for
another two years. This was because the build-tools platform team had
stuffed their roadmap with concurrent v2 projects and argued that any
2

-- 496 of 630 --

deviation from these plans was impossible because of their commitments to
customers.
While we had reservations about this v2 approach (those lessons informed
much of Chapter 8), it was clear that the build-tools platform team had
customers eagerly awaiting delivery. It wasn’t enough to align these teams
on purpose and strategy; we had to drill all the way down to aligning on
plans.
Align Only on Larger Projects, Not on Every
Detail
When we talk about aligning plans, we mean taking only the significant
projects (one developer year or bigger) and looking at each one’s
dependencies on other platform areas and justification for being a priority
for those areas. This comes back to Chapter 7: the path to alignment success
will not come from building a highly detailed plan spanning all platform
teams. That’s too much work, too much detail, and will keep teams from
having some agility (which the business will demand when urgent needs
arise).
We’ve heard concerns about this recommendation—some worry that
leaving out smaller projects in assessments means losing visibility of
everything a team is planning and increasing the risk of leaders gaming the
process by hiding their pet projects as minor efforts. However,

-- 497 of 630 --

gamesmanship happens even when the smaller projects are included, with
overly optimistic/pessimistic estimates of effort and risk to fit whatever
narrative gets the plan approved or secures the most headcount. The way to
avoid gamesmanship is building a common culture and having leadership
from all teams reporting up in parallel to engineering management as a
checks and balances mechanism. This allows you to focus only on the big
projects and trust that your alignment and culture will keep the small stuff
in check.
Be Forthright in Confronting Misalignment
Platform leaders will have to collaboratively make tough calls about
roadmap items that benefit Platform A’s users at the cost of Platform B’s
plans (e.g., if team B has to contribute work to unblock team A, or delay
their plans to avoid forcing too many migrations on the same users). This
presents two challenges:
These trade-offs become political. While we would like platform
engineers to rationally choose work based on the needs of the company,
most people also want to see “their” work succeed, especially when
delivering impact ties to organizational recognition systems like
compensation and promotions.
It’s rarely clear which of the competing initiatives is most important.
Each team’s plans resolve customer pain points and move the product
strategy forward. In an ideal world you’d be able to accommodate both,

-- 498 of 630 --

but the reality is that some hard decisions will have to be made based on
what’s better for the company overall.
Weak platform leadership often takes the easy route of greenlighting each
team’s proposals to avoid confrontation, thinking they can be agile and
make course corrections later. While agility is great for decisions that
impact only a single team, it’s a different story when those decisions ripple
out to other platform teams and their customers. Eventually, those ripples
will need to be smoothed out, and postponing that just means more work
will get thrown out and customers will be left scratching their heads over
missed deadlines and shifted roadmaps. It’s important to bite the bullet and
hash things out early to avoid a bigger mess later.
Amazon, where Ian spent a decade of his career, has a leadership principle
aimed at avoiding this conflict avoidance trap—they want leaders
committed to their cause, but also willing to commit to an outcome
otherwise:
Have Backbone; Disagree and Commit
Leaders are obligated to respectfully challenge decisions when they
disagree, even when doing so is uncomfortable or exhausting.
Leaders have conviction and are tenacious. They do not compromise
for the sake of social cohesion. Once a decision is determined, they
commit wholly.

-- 499 of 630 --

People often focus on the “Disagree and Commit” part of this principle, but
miss that “Have Backbone” comes first. Your platform team has strong
leaders. If you want them to eventually commit to a decision they disagree
with, they first need a forum in which to put forth their best case.
Final Alignment Comes from Principled
Leadership
But how do the platform leaders get to a final decision they can commit to?
Is it up to the platform engineering organization’s “biggest boss” to pick
winners and losers? We’ve all experienced situations where a senior leader
picked the winners in a seemingly arbitrary fashion, leaving teams with the
impression that the leader didn’t understand or care about their needs or
those of their customers. On the other hand, someone has to make the final
decision, or we end up hurting our customers by making plans we can’t
deliver on.
To resolve this quandary, senior leaders need to apply a deliberate rationale
to making decisions, and this must be clearly communicated to everyone
involved. The process of getting to the decision needs to be collaborative
and transparent. “Disagree and commit” is not in fact a matter of the most
senior person arbitrarily deciding; rather, it is about creating a process
where the team can get aligned behind the decision because they understand
what led to it. Succeeding comes through doing the work of planning and

-- 500 of 630 --

consolidating, as we discussed in Chapters 5 and 7, and applying those
plans across the team.
Tying It Together: Getting an
Organization to Alignment
Aligning on major initiatives tends to become an acute challenge for
platform teams once the combined team is big enough that there are several
distinct areas, each with multiple teams working on them. Each of these
area teams will inevitably have big things they want to do to move their part
of the platform forward, and even if you’ve developed a pretty high-
functioning organization, the question of which of these big projects to
work on is a tough one. Camille experienced this when leading a platform
organization of around 100 people (out of ~1,000 engineers at the company)
with a large surface area and a number of platforms that were struggling to
scale. While the team had come together culturally by balancing its skills,
focusing on customer needs, and improving support and on-call practices,
there was remaining tension around rearchitecture work and major
investments. Every area team was sure it needed immediate, deep
investment in order to solve underlying technical issues, scale for the future,
and deliver the next major customer feature, and these projects were
competing for attention and change budget from the users themselves.

-- 501 of 630 --

In the last section, we talked about such a case of competition between the
OS platform team and the build-tools platform team. The OS platform team
was sure they needed immutable images to avoid mutating OS updates
impacting low-latency and CI customers. The build-tools platform team
was sure they needed to decompose their current bespoke platform so that
they could support more industry-standard tooling and take advantage of a
hot open source build system, Bazel, to improve performance. Each team
had done scoping and roadmap planning, which revealed that not only were
these large projects with large migrations, but each migration would create
significant work for the other team. There was no way they could do both of
these migrations simultaneously, so how could they resolve the conflict?
Each leader thought their area was the most important, each product
management leader also thought their area was the most important, and
both had customers advocating for their solutions. The teams were
deadlocked.
Resolving this deadlock was not easy. Here’s how the process went:
1. First, each team made a bottom-up roadmap with estimates for the
upcoming year, where they would invest, and which projects would
require additional funding. This was the outcome of the product roadmap
process from Chapter 5, feeding into the bottom-up roadmap estimation
process described in Chapter 7.
2. Using this input, the leadership team (made up of heads of each area,
product management, and the chief architect) identified common themes

-- 502 of 630 --

across the teams that spoke to both technical and product challenges.
Five of these became the high-level objectives for the organization,
reflecting the areas that everyone agreed were most important and the
general approaches they would use to address them. For example, one
hypothesis was that they were failing to meet users’ needs because they
had tried to deliver end-to-end solutions without providing stable
building blocks, so the objective was “building blocks, not batteries
included.” These objectives were used to reprioritize the product
investments across the teams. Projects that sounded like good ideas but
didn’t match the objectives were cut in order to drive measurable
progress in the objective areas.
3. Next came a series of meetings where the area heads’ roadmaps were
reviewed by peer heads, senior ICs, and product managers. These
reviews revealed places where the teams had been overly optimistic
about the costs of doing something, especially when their plans had
impact on other platform areas that had not been considered. Through
this exercise, they managed to weed out some overly optimistic projects.
4. Finally, each area head was asked to come to the group with the projects
they saw as misaligned to the overall goals and thought should be
dropped. This only worked because they had started to trust one another,
and they trusted Camille to help them prioritize for the best interest of
the overall company, so they didn’t play political games to try to kill one
another’s projects but rather brought their honest opinions. This further
highlighted projects that seemed risky or optional, and some (but not

-- 503 of 630 --

all!) of the identified projects were either cut or had their scope reduced
for the year. The product objectives were again used to make priority
calls based on their potential impact.
5. At the end of this process, the overall project list could accommodate the
most important stakeholder work, everyone understood the investments
their peers were making, and, while there were still disagreements, the
team as a whole could commit to moving forward with the
understanding that they would course correct as needed.
This process did not result in perfect alignment across the team, but it laid
the groundwork to enable that “disagree and commit” approach. While the
OS platform team still thought the company needed to move to immutable
OS images, they could see that this was not a top product priority to begin a
broad migration in the next 12 months. And while Ian (who the OS
platform team reported to) didn’t agree with the build-tools platform team’s
strategy to migrate the build systems to Bazel, he saw that his peer had a
reasoned argument for continuing the work, and moreover had sacrificed
other projects in the process of planning. This helped him commit to
supporting the project, despite lingering doubts. Some of these strategies
still failed, including the Bazel migration, but others that were contentious
(such as moving the company to Git) prepared the foundations for
important platform improvements over the years.
This is what success in driving platform alignment looks like from an
execution perspective, and this process applies to major product investment

-- 504 of 630 --

conflicts as much as it applies to rearchitecting and technical investment
conflicts. It will be time-consuming, frustrating, and messy, but you can
achieve success by proactively gathering the details to justify decisions,
putting up with the frustration and possible disappointment, and slowly
course correcting. Ultimately, this is much better for the company than
leadership avoiding conflict, letting everyone go their own way for far too
long, and leaving it for the next generation to make even harder calls after
much deeper investments have been made.
Wrapping Up
So, how does alignment contribute to platform success? We’re frequently
asked the question: how do we know our platform is good, or getting
better? Well, the only way to measure success is to agree on a target and
aim for it. If you go through the detailed exercise of aligning your teams
and their plans, at the end of it you will have a much clearer understanding
of what your focus areas should be, and a set of goals and work items to
help you achieve those goals. If you have done the product work necessary
to identify the market you’re targeting, and you regularly get feedback from
the users rather than looking only at your internal metrics, you will know
whether your platform is getting better at the things you have chosen to
focus on. This doesn’t mean that you’ve chosen to do the right things; we
can all make strategic mistakes! But without this work, you will never be
able to make conscious improvements in the capabilities of your platforms.

-- 505 of 630 --

Here’s a secret about this chapter: nothing about it is particularly unique to
platform engineering. If you want to be a successful leader of any type of
team, creating a shared purpose and aligning your team culturally around
that purpose is critical. You need to have a strategy for what you are going
to do, and a way to break that strategy down across the parts of your team to
execute against it, so that they all understand what is important overall and
can make informed decisions on where to focus.
The particularity with a platform engineering team is that the value you
produce is usually several steps removed from clear measures of success
such as revenue growth, so it’s rare that you have business-driven
deliverables dictating your roadmap. The indirect nature of platform value
leaves platform leadership with a lot more discretion to choose where to
invest. This leads to one of the common causes of platform strategy failure:
in the face of many different paths that the team could pursue, and the
challenge of having hard conversations to create alignment about which of
those options to focus on, leaders just don’t make decisions and instead let
individual product teams go off and build what they think is right from their
narrow point of view. This can create some pockets of siloed success, but
the lack of alignment across the team as a whole will always hold it back
from greatness.
Why not have the most senior leader be a product leader? We are both engineering leaders at heart,
and we were worried about a product person managing everything when engineering and operations
were so key to success. But hey, maybe it would work!
1

-- 506 of 630 --

Sometimes called the “inverse Conway maneuver.”
2

-- 507 of 630 --

Chapter 12. Your Platforms Are Trusted
Trust is like the air we breathe—when it’s present, nobody really
notices; when it’s absent, everybody notices.
—Warren Buffett
After the internal focus on building alignment within your team and its
products, the next area of success is external: earning the trust of everyone
else. You may ask, why should we put trust (a feeling or belief) ahead of
results? Surely if you deliver platforms that manage complexity and so
deliver leverage to the organization’s application teams, that is a more
important signal than a second-order signal of trust?
When you get your platform team to a point where they are delivering value
continuously, trust will follow. However, you have platforms in production
today. Features and improvements for these platforms take time to deliver,
and their delivery requires customer trust, in the form of patience and
partnerships for testing, validating, and adoption. Without trust, a single
unfortunate event can render your carefully crafted product roadmaps
useless, forcing you to scramble with throwaway work to manage the crisis.
We have seen platforms lose trust in three main ways:
Operations

-- 508 of 630 --

Not demonstrating operational ability at the scale customers need
Big investment buy-in
Not seeking buy-in on large investments before starting, under the
assumption that no one outside the platform team should care
Being a bottleneck
Becoming a bottleneck to business initiatives, and so reducing rather
than creating business leverage.
In this chapter, we’ll discuss how you can avoid losing trust in each of these
areas.

-- 509 of 630 --

A SUCCESS RED HERRING: THINKING TRUST IN A LEADER IS TRUST IN
THE PLATFORM
One of the worst management mistakes in any type of engineering is when
the team leader oversteps their role as facilitator for collaborative decisions
and instead acts as a benevolent dictator, personally making all the calls—be
they management, engineering, or product decisions. It might seem easier to
trust a single person who understands how product, stakeholder,
engineering, and management decisions intersect, who can short-circuit
conflicts by dictating solutions, and who is most accountable for the team’s
success. However, this approach undermines trust in the long term by failing
to foster trust in any other members of the team.

-- 510 of 630 --

It’s true that the benevolent dictator setup can be efficient, especially when
the leader is a strong communicator and decision maker with a small team
and few users and stakeholders to wrangle. In these scenarios, the leader can
use 1:1 meetings with all of these individuals to understand the nuts and
bolts around any conflict, personally commit to the needed action, and
provide directions to their team, thereby avoiding lengthy documents
detailing trade-offs and contentious deliberation meetings.
The problem with this situation is that what makes it efficient also makes it
brittle. It only works because you have one person with deep expertise in the
platform who (right now) has the time to have regular conversations with all
types of users and stakeholders to maintain their personal trust. Once the
number of customers becomes too big for one person to handle, or that
person moves on (often burned out from trying to work too many hours a
week), you are left with a situation where not only do you no longer have a
decision maker, but you also don’t have any trust.
Now the platform team will have to start from scratch, building up
inherently slower group mechanisms around trust and decision making. It
can take months, if not years, for the product teams to figure out how to
negotiate decisions and establish trust with one another and their
stakeholders. With hindsight, it becomes clear that it would have been far
more efficient for the decision maker to delegate and share some of that
responsibility earlier, to build trust within the team.

-- 511 of 630 --

Does this mean you should never allow someone to take on the benevolent
dictatorial role? No. In fact, a lot of the agility at the scrappy and scalable
stages comes from having someone with a pioneer or settler mindset in this
sort of leadership role, making fast decisions with a small team and a small
number of customers. However, this approach is not sustainable and does
not scale to larger team sizes or customer numbers. If you are such a leader,
you need to challenge yourself to start delegating. This will be hard on you
and the stakeholders, because it will slow down the decision-making process
in the short term. But it’s worth it, because you’ll be building your
stakeholders’ trust in the whole team for the long term.
Trust in How You Operate
You’re probably thinking this is going to be a rehash of Chapter 6: put in
some practices around on-call and support rotations, backed by some SLOs,
change management, and operational reviews, and you deserve trust, right?
As usual, things are not so simple.
We believe all these practices are essential to ensure rigor and hold platform
leadership accountable. However, you can tick all the boxes and still lack
the operational trust of many senior engineers in application teams. Before
they migrate to your platform, this lack of trust may show up as standoffs,
prolonged timelines, and demands for vague “proofs of concept.” Even after

-- 512 of 630 --

adoption, it can cause issues—for instance, when some operational hiccup
leads customers to pressure leadership into letting them build a “simpler”
shadow platform that suits their needs better.
We get it. Earlier in our careers we were those senior application engineers
who didn’t want to adopt shiny new platforms, or who inherited an
application on a shaky general-purpose platform that we wanted to change
out for something simpler. Beyond the seeming lack of control over our fate,
the most frustrating part of being on the application engineering side of
things was when the platform team seemed to underestimate how much
impact we felt due to their critical failures. It was a double trust problem:
“Not only are they bad at operating things, they have no idea they are bad at
operating things!”
The root of the challenge is that you only get good at operating foundational
systems at scale by operating foundational systems at scale. When Ian was
at Amazon, this was such a recurring problem that they developed a saying:
“There is no compression algorithm for experience. You can’t learn certain
lessons without going through the curve.” Where does this put you as a
leader of a platform team, if you see that your senior users don’t really trust
your team operationally? You still have two levers:
1. Accelerate the curve by hiring and empowering leaders with operational
experience at scale.

-- 513 of 630 --

2. Optimize the curve by ordering new use cases based on tolerance for
operational risk.
Let’s look at both, with examples from our backgrounds.
Accelerate Trust by Empowering Experienced
Leaders
When Camille started her first head of platform engineering job, much of
the team she inherited was struggling with operational stability. The
engineering team and the systems had been built in a scrappy fashion, and
they’d grown a lot over the prior few years without much investment in
system improvements, let alone rearchitectures. The team had some new
managers who had come from operational roles at bigger companies, and
they were confident they knew what was needed to stabilize the systems, but
they needed help—cover to focus on this work in light of customer demands
for features, and help inspiring their teams of mostly software engineers to
see the value of doing it.
Looking back, Camille considers herself quite lucky. There was a problem,
yes, but all of the ingredients to solve the problem were already there:
talented, experienced managers; strong engineers; support from the CTO.
With the hiring side taken care of, Camille’s contribution was providing
empowerment—taking the trust problem seriously, setting a broad cultural
mandate about how they would approach operations as an organization, and

-- 514 of 630 --

communicating this in a way that both the team as a whole and the
stakeholders/customers would understand.
To do this, she used what is now a key tool in her management toolkit—the
operational excellence OKR. OKRs were a well-established practice at the
company, but historically they’d always been focused on new capabilities.
Camille established an objective of improving operational stability, and got
each of her leaders to commit to measurable key results their teams would
deliver against this objective. She then shared this broadly to all of
engineering as part of their OKR town hall, to her organization in detail in
the team all-hands, and even to the executive management team (her peers
and so major stakeholders) in quarterly reports.
Creating measurable goals enabled managers to explain to their stakeholders
why they were focusing on operational stability work instead of features,
and what they could expect to see from the work. Calling this out as an
organization-wide focus area made the team take the work more seriously,
and as time went on Camille assigned ownership of this objective to key up-
and-coming leaders in the organization, which gave them the chance to lead
cross-organization initiatives. Tracking this OKR also provided evidence for
the impact of operational initiatives. This evidence was useful for explaining
the value of the work during promotion conversations as well, which had in
the past only looked at new feature delivery as evidence of promotability.

-- 515 of 630 --

The work delivered meaningful outcomes. Customer satisfaction surveys for
these systems showed measurable improvements. The on-call burden for the
systems became more manageable, which improved the happiness of the
engineering teams. And the conversations at a senior level moved away
from blaming the platforms for their constant operational failures and
toward more collegial discussions about new opportunities and features.
Optimize Growth in Trust by Ordering Use Cases
Part of gaining trust means waiting to push adoption until you’re confident
that the systems can support the application’s business needs. This reminds
us of another lesson from our time working together, when many of the
compute and storage platforms were new, and their teams wanted to drive
adoption to prove their value. But the teams hadn’t done enough
performance testing to understand the actual (rather than theoretical)
performance SLOs of their platforms. The result was that when an
application would try to migrate, the system would struggle to meet its
performance needs, causing latency problems and occasional brownouts.
Even when this was done as a controlled proof-of-concept trial, the failures
fed into a lack of trust, giving the impression that the platforms weren’t
ready, and the platform engineers could not understand operational demands
like application engineers did.
In this case, there was also an opportunity that was being ignored. Many of
the potential use cases for the platforms were supporting internal users in

-- 516 of 630 --

their day-to-day workflows. These workflows were important, but could
tolerate some amount of latency and downtime. With the new attention to
stability, Camille’s leaders used the lens of performance sensitivity to think
about whether they were moving the right use cases onto their offerings.
They started to evaluate based not just on the platform features but also on
how confident they were that the platform could meet the customers’
operational and performance demands.
This changed the way they thought about their roadmaps and features.
Instead of thinking of an offering as done the minute they got one customer
successfully onboarded, the teams took a staged approach, starting by
onboarding less critical applications. These applications provided data they
could use for performance tuning and ironing out other bugs. Once they had
these improvements in hand, they used them to gain the trust of the next
tranche of more critical use cases, and so on.
There are no shortcuts to scaling up a team’s operational ability, but by
empowering the right leaders who put trust ahead of adoption, you will
move faster up the curve.
Trust in Your Big Investments
Big investments, whether in a new platform or a major rearchitecture,
require an enormous amount of faith ahead of demonstrated value. Not only
do they take a long time to fully deliver (usually years), but they pull

-- 517 of 630 --

developers away from delivering faster value on the current platforms. As a
result, customers waiting on the results of this big investment are prone to
criticize the motivation behind the project. They may accuse the platform
team of prioritizing “resume-driven development,” putting fancy new
technologies ahead of more mundane work that they believe would provide
more immediate business value. Engineers love to grumble about each other,
and you can’t avoid all such feedback. Success means that your key
stakeholders understand and trust the rationale behind the investment.
If you skip this and initiate the work by saying “Trust me, this is important;
it’s my team, and I’m responsible,” you are headed for trouble. When users
come to you with pain points and you respond that you can’t address their
needs because the platform is undergoing a rearchitecture, you can expect
that they will start to complain upward. If you haven’t already gotten buy-in,
these user complaints will result in pressing questions from senior
stakeholders about your strategy: Why are we funding this work when the
current users aren’t getting what they need? Why are they using technology
X? Who signed off on this? Unless the new project is going perfectly (and
when does that happen?), you can find your entire roadmap flipped over. To
avoid this, you need to get the trust up front.
Seek Technical Stakeholder Buy-in for Trust of
Rearchitectures

-- 518 of 630 --

When rearchitecting, it’s critical to spend time explaining to stakeholders
what you’re doing and why before you start the work. This is why in
Chapter 8 we suggest a formal decision-making process to guide these
investments, which generates a record that shows not just the justifications
for the decision to fund the project, but that your teams are held to high
standards for such justifications.
While management stakeholders might be satisfied with evidence that you
have gone through a strict vetting of these investments, senior ICs (staff
engineers and the like) will want to see more, particularly around technical
decisions. That is why even if your company doesn’t have a standard
“design review” or RFC process, you should still produce a yearly project
proposal, similar to what we discussed in Chapter 7. In the spirit of
Amazon’s “Have Backbone; Disagree and Commit” leadership principle, if
you don’t let senior engineers in customer teams give their feedback before
you start, you should not expect them to “shut up and commit” when you
later push for their teams’ adoption.
Seek Executive Sponsorship for Trust of New
Products
When proposing a new product, you have an opportunity to get more than
baseline technical and investment buy-in. This is a chance to get executive
sponsorship from more senior stakeholders who can bring a bigger-picture
perspective of what might be most meaningful to the business. Platform

-- 519 of 630 --

leaders often get focused on the technical goals: can we scale, can we
operate, can we reduce costs, and so on. They can end up focusing on these
goals in a vacuum, forgetting that platforms are expensive to build and have
a high opportunity cost for the business; after all, these engineers could be
building other things for the company. Furthermore, sometimes platform
engineers (and leaders) confuse the platform itself with the outcomes they’re
trying to drive—the existence of a new platform isn’t an outcome.
Bringing in other leaders to hear about what matters to their areas of the
business can help you avoid blind spots in the platform design. It’s easy to
assume that everyone cares about costs, or performance, or 24x7
availability, but often when you dig in you realize that the real problem is
not what you thought. They can also provide guidance as to whether you’re
aligned to their technology strategy; you might think that a core application
or architecture pattern is critical, while they are planning to cut that
investment in favor of another area of business growth.
Maintain Old Systems to Retain Trust
Even with stakeholder buy-in, big investments are high-risk activities.
Executive sponsorship lasts only so long; if you’re working on a 12-month
or longer project, you want to get out of the mindset that legacy
improvements are pointless throwaway work, because your users won’t see
the new system for a long time yet. We don’t just mean doing basic KTLO
work here. You need to keep investing in system improvements until load on

-- 520 of 630 --

the old system is significantly falling. Further, as we discussed in
Chapter 10, sometimes you need to add new features as well, either to
accommodate urgent business needs or just to mollify your customers and
their stakeholders.
No matter how confident you are in the big investments, others will have
reasonable doubts; if you don’t give some ground to maintaining their old
systems in the meantime, you will lose their trust.
Gaining Trust Requires Flexibility on What Is
“Right”
In the following example, we return to the time when Ian was working as a
compute platform leader. One of his teams was in the process of digging
themselves out of a lot of operational instability. While they had put the
right leadership in place to improve the operational practices, there was still
mistrust from important stakeholders—especially one of the most business-
critical teams, which we’ll call Icicle.
The Icicle team had a workload that was very sensitive to performance
latency, and they had historically solved that problem by running their
workload only on highly customized bare-metal servers. The problem with
this was that these servers had low utilization and high cost. Their own
business leadership wanted to improve their cost efficiency, but they trusted
the judgment of their engineering team over that of the platform team. And

-- 521 of 630 --

the Icicle engineers saw that the current platform’s approach to reducing
costs (oversubscription of the servers) was causing unpredictable latency
problems, which they were not willing to tolerate.
By treating this as a technical problem, the two teams had reached a
stalemate over what was the “right” next step. The compute team wanted the
Icicle engineers to provide “hard SLOs” that would allow the compute team
to design and test a solution. The Icicle team wanted the compute engineers
to build an extensive “stress test engine” to prove that their platform would
perform under real-world conditions. The result of the stalemate was low
trust, to the point that the Icicle engineers proposed to staff up their own
shadow platform team to meet their special needs.
To resolve this stalemate, Ian and his leadership team changed not only their
roadmap but also their product strategy. They put together a new offering
that ripped out all of their platform’s oversubscription features. Yes, the new
offering was more expensive than the older offering, but it was still a
substantial improvement over the bare metal the Icicle team was using.
Even with this concession, the Icicle engineering team was unconvinced it
would be operated to their standards. As a result, the platform team first
shipped it for data science users, delivering improved performance to a
highly visible business group and building confidence in the system design
through this effort. Only after six months of demonstrated operational

-- 522 of 630 --

success did they earn enough trust to get the Icicle engineering team to
commit to moving to the platform.
By being flexible in finding a solution that would meet the needs of both
technical and business stakeholders, and showing that they were committed
to operating that solution to high standards, the team was able to move past
a stalemate that was fundamentally about a lack of trust.
Trust to Prioritize Delivery
Finally, you need trust that your platform will not slow business delivery. It
doesn’t matter how much you manage complexity or make developers
productive in the longer term; platforms that are a bottleneck to delivering
business value clearly have questionable leverage in that moment. Even
when the initiative is something understood to be difficult, like standing up
your platforms on a new cloud vendor, people outside of the platform team
tend to underestimate the complexity of the work. As the bottleneck drags
on, they lose trust and start questioning every aspect of the platform team’s
decision making, sometimes even questioning the utility of the platform
entirely.
In this section we bring together three activities that are critical to avoiding
these bottlenecks: velocity of delivery, prioritization, and challenging
assumptions of product scope.

-- 523 of 630 --

Create a Culture of Velocity
When they hear complaints that the platform team is a bottleneck, it is
common for stakeholders and your executives to blame a lack of planning.
And it is true that if you have not done any of the planning work we discuss
throughout this book, they may have a point. If you’re prioritizing big
rearchitectures or building new platforms when the business demands are
not being met by your existing platforms, you may very well have a
planning and prioritization problem to solve.
But in the face of an agile and dynamic business, it’s a mistake to think that
planning solves all trust issues. Circling back to Chapter 1, there is a reason
Agile won over waterfall—there is enough uncertainty about the business
value of most features that it is far higher-leverage to build something fast,
get feedback, and make it better. If that’s a two-week iteration cycle for
application teams, momentum is absolutely destroyed by a platform team
saying “this needs to wait until next quarter’s OKRs.” That is why planning
—by your team or by your customer teams—cannot be the only solution to
delivery bottlenecks. Not only do you waste their time seeking clarity of
value that the business cannot provide, but you also create a culture that
insists that the business not providing perfect roadmap requirements is a
fault, as opposed to a fact of life.
When Ian led a platform organization that often found itself crucial to an
application organization’s dynamic new feature needs, he shaped its culture

-- 524 of 630 --

to uphold the value of velocity: balancing the throughput that came with
planning via a responsive, agile approach to unplanned application
demands. There were two goals to this:
To stress to his team that it was not acceptable to resist a new application
team ask just because it wasn’t in their earlier plans
To remind his stakeholders that not telling his team early about their
needs would result in higher costs, because the plan would have to
change to accommodate the new work
Prioritize Projects to Free Up Team Capacity
We asked Diego Quiroga, a senior platform engineering leader, to describe
his experience of turning around a team that was on the brink of becoming a
bottleneck to the business. What follows is from Diego.

-- 525 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 526 of 630 --

As I stepped into the engineering leader role for our platform team, I began
to learn about our domain and look for interesting problems to solve. One
team reporting to me was a small platform team with the critical
responsibility of managing an array of foundational services powering an
enterprise social network. Application teams relied on this platform’s
diverse capabilities to craft customer-facing features.
The platform team remained integral to the development of these features.
During each quarterly planning cycle, application teams would articulate
their requests for new capabilities or enhancements of existing ones. Due to
the team’s limited bandwidth, several of these asks inevitably fell below the
line, and the backlog continued to grow.
While the organization valued our efforts, there was mounting concern over
the team’s ability to manage the growing backlog, especially as a delay in
certain features would jeopardize the organization’s objectives for business
growth. Previously, in an attempt to tackle this dynamic above all others, the
team had compromised their investment in operations, leading to not just an
increased on-call burden, but also negative perceptions regarding the
platform’s operational stability.
With fixed headcount as a constraint, I worked with the team to understand
the nature of our customers’ requests, seeking patterns that might reveal
opportunities for efficiencies elsewhere. Looking back over a year’s worth
of data, we identified several recurring requests, such as configuration

-- 527 of 630 --

changes across a complex chain of services required to establish new feeds.
This presented an opportunity to package these requests in a self-service
manner that would minimize future workload for the team.
In the face of being an active bottleneck, making the case for an investment
in team efficiency presented challenges. Balancing the immediate value of
tangible features against a promise of increased team throughput was a
tough sell. To maintain the trust of leadership that allowed us to sustain the
effort, it was critical for us to demonstrate the impact of the investments
with clear visuals and metrics.
Following the completion of the project, we introduced this new “self-
serve” capability to our portfolio. Customer requests that had previously
demanded the undivided attention of a platform engineer for an entire month
now required only a few consulting sessions, allowing us extra capacity to
dedicate to other pieces of work. In a scenario where a long-term roadmap
from the application teams was not available, relying on past trends for
investment decisions was a calculated bet. This one paid off well and set a
precedent for seeking out similar opportunities in subsequent planning
cycles.
We adopted a similar strategy to enhance our team’s response time to
support requests. Application teams regularly sought the team’s assistance
for code reviews, guidance on utilizing platform capabilities, and resolving
operational issues. As the engineering organization expanded, the team

-- 528 of 630 --

fielded an average of 30 weekly support requests. Despite having a
dedicated engineer to manage triage, the pressure mounted for quicker
responses, especially toward the end of each quarter. To address this, we
allocated capacity to develop new troubleshooting dashboards and self-
diagnosis tools, offloading noncritical workloads to the application teams.
Implementing “canned responses” that directed users to documentation also
was effective in reducing the volume of such requests.
With the bottlenecks addressed, the team’s projects evolved into more
interesting, impactful, and high-leverage work, increasing the engagement
of the engineers. Customers benefited too—with the newfound surplus
capacity, we were able to consistently address performance and reliability
issues and establish a reputation for operational excellence. Overall, while
the analysis was not cheap and the projects somewhat of a risk in returning
value, they were absolutely critical in transitioning us from being a
bottleneck for the business to being its trusted foundation instead.
Challenge Assumptions About Product Scope
Prioritizing delivery for platforms is a constant give and take; ideally, we
build broadly useful offerings that meet the majority of our customers’
needs, and we aren’t under constant pressure to quickly add features as part
of the critical path for an application team. But there are some cases where

-- 529 of 630 --

the key characteristics of the platform give it a scope that leads to inherent
bottlenecks—namely:
1. The platform is trying to expose a large surface area of functionality.
2. The platform is trying to support a diverse set of applications.
3. The platform is developed in such a way that it cannot trust its own users
to unblock themselves.
A classic example of this occurs at companies that put responsibility for all
public cloud adoption on a centralized cloud enablement team, and charge
them with ensuring not only that developers can get access to the cloud
offerings they need quickly, but also that there is significant security vetting
of the offerings and the way teams can use them. This case almost perfectly
hits the three characteristics we just described:
1. The surface area of the public cloud offerings that developers might want
to use is huge and, worse, changes pretty quickly.
2. Unless the company is very small, the team is going to be supporting a
wide set of applications and developers who probably have many
divergent opinions about which of the public cloud offerings they want to
use for their applications.
3. The best way to resolve this would be to let application teams resolve it
for themselves, but they can’t trust these developers with the superuser
access to do whatever they want for security reasons, so they are stuck

-- 530 of 630 --

trying to prioritize and negotiate what will be enabled, with new requests
coming in all the time.
To reduce the bottleneck in situations like this, we have had some success
with diminishing the scope, by supporting fewer application types and
providing more curated, higher-level product offerings. Instead of unlocking
cloud primitives for everyone, we built platforms that orchestrate compute
and storage for major use cases, providing a smaller but focused surface
area that allowed the platform team to make the right choices about the
underlying management of the cloud infrastructure. This may seem like
introducing an unnecessary middleman, but it allowed for a platform that
integrated core company concepts around identity management and security,
handled the complexity of the cloud on behalf of users, and drove major
leverage for the company.
Even this solution was imperfect; for cases where teams wanted access to
cloud products outside of those wrapped in the platform, there was still a
bottleneck to evaluate, secure, and enable the new product. But limiting that
to edge cases by building rich platforms for the common 80% meant that the
team was able to clear these bottlenecks more quickly.
Where you are building platforms to enable your users without granting
them too much trust, it’s important to think about the platform features with
an eye toward how you will manage or avoid these bottlenecks:

-- 531 of 630 --

Have you considered limiting the scope by supporting only certain types
of applications?
Have you iterated and identified the right abstraction that will support
customers without exposing such a large surface area?
Have you designed a system where users can contribute to unblocking
themselves by limiting the control points that might require a
security/compliance review?
Have you included extensibility mechanisms for some platform features
to be augmented by your users themselves?
You may need all four of these approaches to solve your biggest challenges:
a limited scope with good abstractions to cover the common cases, and
better practices for extensibility and user-driven contributions for the edges.
Tying It Together: The Case of the
Overcoupled Platform
We’ll call this story from our past “The Case of the Overcoupled Platform.”
The problems started with a two-year push to build platforms that were
“batteries included.” This was in reaction to a prior generation of platforms
whose benevolent dictators were all thinking in silos as they built their
individual platforms, and so nothing worked together. “Batteries included”
was used to convey the vision of a heavily aligned approach to product
strategy going forward. The vision painted was much less about platforms

-- 532 of 630 --

being “products” and more about platforms enabling “workflows,” so
customers would be able to use the platforms without having to build things
themselves, and without being troubled by the operations of what was
underneath. In many ways, this sounds like an ideal “glueless” platform—
isn’t this type of end-to-end focus the reason people love Apple products?
So what was the problem with applying it to these internal platforms?
Unfortunately, the high bar of “batteries included” meant that the platform
teams needed to design the end-to-end workflow impact for every use case
before they could start writing code. This was hard enough that the initial
offerings took shortcuts, and as new feature sets developed over time
everything became deeply coupled. This deep coupling made rearchitectures
especially hard, leading to the platform teams deciding they needed to
rewrite everything into v2s that would deliver architectural improvements
with feature innovations. Of course, these ambitious scopes caused massive
delays and increasing customer frustration.
These platform teams were caught in their own swamp, offering end-to-end
workflows that were always not quite done, not quite ready, not quite
reliable, and not quite what the customers wanted. This meant that while
“batteries included” had been a great trust unifier in the early days of close
collaboration and progress, as the platform organization’s delivery ground to
a halt due to the coupling, and the solution was seemingly only to build v2s,
trust had very much dissipated; more than one stakeholder gave the

-- 533 of 630 --

feedback that “your organization builds new platforms for the sake of
building new platforms.”
To correct for this, Camille needed to switch up the approach, and she knew
she had to address not just the cultural aspect but the product side as well.
Thus, she set forward an OKR objective of “building blocks, not batteries
included” (as mentioned in Chapter 11). This metaphor was based on the
following three concepts:
Treat building blocks as foundational.
In their efforts to quickly create the first version of the batteries-
included workflows, the team had integrated different platforms at the
component level, as opposed to using well-defined APIs. As
workflow features grew, these components were often not
operationally stable—poorly defined interfaces led to systems that
were difficult to change, difficult to test, and difficult to monitor. To
address this, the team paused on some of the workflow features to
make sure the building blocks of those workflows were solid.
Blocks are composable.
Component-level coupling was not just a problem for stability, it was
a problem for improving the “batteries included” workflows that
crossed platforms. That coupling meant changes in one platform
sometimes had unexpected side effects in other parts of the workflow,
greatly slowing down feature delivery. Worse, fixating on platform

-- 534 of 630 --

use as workflows rather than abstractions completely precluded
advanced customers unblocking themselves by building their own
workflows. The building blocks approach recognized that, even while
the team would still provide end-to-end wrappers for common
workflows, they also needed individual platform abstractions to
isolate side effects. This allowed platform teams to debug and
manage their systems more easily, and it allowed trusted customers to
“pierce” the workflow abstraction and unblock themselves.
Blocks can be switched out incrementally.
As we mentioned in Chapter 11, the whole platform organization
went through an alignment process that picked out some big
initiatives to pause so that the team could focus on the most important
ones and still have time to deliver solutions for more immediate
demands. It was not enough to promise that a big v2 would
revolutionize the platform and solve all the users’ problems
eventually; proposals were now evaluated based on (1) whether they
could be delivered incrementally as rearchitectures, (2) their
migration costs, and (3) executive support for the potential business
value.
This approach meant that, in some places, the team backtracked on usability
in order to stabilize, decouple, and remove bottlenecks. Camille built senior
stakeholder support through incremental unblocking, including our earlier
example of Ian’s team delivering a better offering for the high-performance
1

-- 535 of 630 --

users. Going back to the Apple analogy, the platform offerings became a lot
more like early Android devices—not as polished, but allowing a lot more
options. You can argue your preference there, but we are confident that for
internal engineering platforms the value of stability and future flexibility for
platform customers cannot be sacrificed in the name of ideal usability.
Wrapping Up
Trust takes much longer to build than it does to destroy. Many events
outside of your control can erode trust: black swan operational issues, major
business changes that you can’t keep up with, team turnover that leaves you
unable to execute despite thorough planning. Knowing that these risks are
ever-present, leaders must work hard to shore up trust through everything
they do.
We see this as one of the most common ways that platform leaders fail their
companies. Through their own hubris, they believe that they know better,
they don’t bother to communicate with adequate transparency, and they trust
their teams to the exclusion of listening to their customers and stakeholders.
When you accept that success in the job requires building and maintaining
trust, you take the steps necessary to deliver trustworthy platforms that can
keep up with business demands.
See Will Larson’s article “Providing Pierceable Abstractions” for a larger writeup of this idea.
1

-- 536 of 630 --

Chapter 13. Your Platforms Manage
Complexity
We must design for the way people behave, not for how we would
wish them to behave.
—Donald A. Norman, Living with Complexity
We started this book by describing the “why” behind platform engineering.
What is the problem to be solved? The rapid increase of complexity in
technology is slowing application engineering teams down, and the
business is getting less value per developer over time. Why do we need
platform engineering? Because it takes a holistic approach to the problem of
complexity, allowing a team of software and systems experts to reduce the
drag of complexity on the application teams.
This does not mean that platforms remove all complexity. Platforms
generate leverage by effectively managing complexity, not eliminating it; as
a leader of a platform team you must become very comfortable addressing
complexity in everything you do.
In this chapter, we’ll highlight four areas where complexity needs to be
managed to ensure you are on a successful path:

-- 537 of 630 --

Accidental complexity, where attempts by a platform to address
complexity in fact just move the problem somewhere else, often creating
new work for humans
Shadow platforms, which are a delicate game of letting application
organizations be agile, without ending up with a complex outcome of
many similar shadow platforms
Uncontrolled growth, where the only way a platform organization
manages complexity is under an assumption it can hire new engineers
tomorrow to deal with the tech debt created today
Product discovery, or understanding that, for some problems, it will take
iterative attempts at delivery to discover the product that actually reduces
complexity for both the customer and the platform team
As this chapter’s introductory quote points out, we must be realistic about
human behavior when designing solutions. A technology approach is
necessary but not sufficient; leverage comes when we combine technology
with an understanding of human and organizational dynamics to tackle all
aspects of complexity.

-- 538 of 630 --

A SUCCESS RED HERRING: THE SINGLE PANE OF GLASS
The idea of bundling everything into a “single pane of glass” is a popular
concept in tech UX these days. Many open source and vendor tools promise
to give you a single UI to control your whole system, manage your whole
development experience, or streamline all of your communication.
Reducing cognitive load for users by providing one UI for everything seems
like a smart way to remove unnecessary complexity, and many teams invest
heavily in building unified UIs, betting that they will solve their UX
problems. These initiatives usually start off strong and deliver value for
some common use cases, but in our experience, this early success does not
sustain itself over time.
Camille saw this firsthand when a DevEx platform team she managed
decided that developers had too many different places to go to find
information about their work: one for code reviews, one for build progress,
one for tickets, one for code search, and, of course, their chosen editor for
writing code and the command line for various other activities. To address
this complexity, the team brought some of these activities together into a
single pane of glass web UI to improve flow and protect people from
context switching.
This seemed like a good idea at first, but over time the team realized that in
order to keep everyone in their in-house interface, they would have to re-
create all of the workflows from each of the underlying vendor tools they
were using. These vendors in turn were themselves each trying to become
1

-- 539 of 630 --

the single pane of glass by providing hooks and integrations with one
another. Over time, the team realized that their “single pane of glass” was
becoming either an extra stop between the developer and the UI they
needed to get to or a worse version of the real thing.
They also hit another complication that’s common when building tools and
platforms for developers: the developers didn’t want to use the interface.
Developers are picky about the way they work. Many want nothing to do
with UIs, and prefer to do as much as possible on the command line; others
want everything integrated with their IDE; still others want ChatOps
integrations (but only when they’re on-call). The platform’s single pane of
glass would only work for one persona; not only do different humans have
different personas, but the same human may operate with the same tools as
different personas depending on the role (support engineer, software
developer, project manager) they are playing that day. The team ultimately
realized that it was better to rely on the integrations available in GitHub,
Slack, Jira, etc., and integrate their platform into these common offerings to
account for the different personas and their demands.
As this example shows, the single pane of glass concept is often best
generalized to something else. While we might build these experiences for
certain scenarios, the goal is not so much the pane of glass itself but the
ergonomics of a setup where everything a user needs is within reach.
Recognizing that your systems will need to accommodate different personas
using different tools at different times, the basic building block of your

-- 540 of 630 --

ergonomic environment is the API and the corresponding data model. By
starting not with the single pane of glass but with the APIs that will power
that interface, you leave yourself room to develop different experiences
depending on the persona. You can create an easy UI for basic use cases,
but allow developers who prefer the command line to integrate there (and
rely on the existing UIs for your tools where possible as these are likely to
be better than anything you can provide).
UIs are inherently complex and hard to build right, so if your goal is to
reduce complexity, we recommend you start by ensuring your products
have accessible, documented, coherent API access. Follow REST standards
for your APIs, as closely as is possible. Name things consistently; do one
thing per call and don’t require stateful sequences of calls to do one thing;
plan for backward-consistency and try not to change your APIs too often
once they are released. From here, you can explore integrations with
command-line tools, chatbot-type interfaces, IDE support, and yes, web
interfaces. It’s still hard to reduce the complexity of your API layer, but if
you neglect that, it’s unlikely a UI will solve the problem.
Managing the Accidental Complexity of
Human Coordination

-- 541 of 630 --

A key measure of success in managing complexity is evaluating how much
glue application teams still need to build to work with your platforms. As
introduced in Chapter 1, “glue” refers to the code, automation,
configuration, and tools that these teams build to hold things together. Glue
is a response to the complexity of managing the underlying systems, and
platforms should aim to create abstractions that eliminate the need for each
application team to build their own. Less overall glue is a sign that you have
reduced the infrastructure complexity for application teams.
There is another type of glue that we didn’t talk about in Chapter 1: human
glue. This is the “glue work” that Tanya Reilly so eloquently describes in
her talk and blog post “Being Glue”: all of the manual workarounds,
documentation, and coordination needed to resolve gaps between the things
a team needs to do and what they are actually doing. In a quest to limit the
technical glue from Chapter 1, some platform teams end up creating a new
“accidental” complexity by over-relying on human glue.
Imagine a platform that hasn’t bothered with operational tooling for its
application teams. It’s like trying to drive an old car with the hood welded
shut—you don’t expect most drivers to know how to fix their engine, but
they still need to know where the smoke is coming from. When an incident
happens and the platform hasn’t provided enough diagnostic tools, the
application team is stuck. Instead of handling the issues themselves, they
have to get on a call with the platform team to figure out if the platform is
the culprit, which is frustrating for both teams. As we covered in Chapter 6,

-- 542 of 630 --

exposing platform metrics and using synthetic monitors is key to avoiding
these escalations. Complex outages will still sneak up on you, but with
proper tooling, you can stop using platform engineers and DevOps/SREs as
human dashboards.
If you’re looking for a rule of thumb to know whether you’re doing enough
to manage complexity, ask yourself how often you rely on “human glue” to
resolve issues. Do you rely on manual processes to coordinate open source
software upgrades, or to drive fixes for common application outages? As
engineers, we believe that humans should be reserved for managing the
truly complex scenarios, and we should apply software to resolve the
merely complicated. In the following sidebar, we give an example for the
case of migrations; in general, the less you need to rely on humans to
coordinate programs across your platform and the application teams that
use it, the better you are at removing complexity from your users’ lives.

-- 543 of 630 --

MANAGING MIGRATION COMPLEXITY
We covered one of our migration success stories in Chapter 9: in the face of
a major operating system version upgrade, Camille challenged her team to
do everything they could to complete the migration without human project
management support. The team responded by first writing a small piece of
code that tracked each host, whether it needed to be upgraded, and by
whom. This was run daily to produce a report that showed how the
migration was progressing. The report was then fed into Jira, which
automatically created and assigned tickets with details about what needed to
be done to complete the migration.
Of course, this wasn’t as simple as it sounds. A key element for success was
the ownership metadata registry mentioned in Chapter 2, which provided
tracking of which code belonged to which team. That data was used to
bootstrap the process of figuring out where to assign the tickets. The team
then wrote code to apply heuristics to various identifiers associated with the
system resources in order to find the most likely person to assign the tickets
to, and thus minimized the churn of incorrect assignments. This turned into
a useful system for tracking and maintaining ownership data more broadly,
which could then power other migrations.
This changed the way most migration exercises were approached across the
company, reducing the complicated human-driven processes into more
predictable machine-driven ones. Instead of defaulting to project managers
tracking spreadsheets and endless status update meetings, the team spent

-- 544 of 630 --

time making the tool more powerful through more nuanced dependency
mappings and smart reminders, and they put more time into automating
common elements of the migrations so there was less migration work for
the customer teams. Over time, the biggest challenge we had with this
process was that too many groups wanted to use it to drive migrations
before they had thought through the details of the migration process.
We did not completely eliminate the need for TPMs, but their role evolved
from doing hand-to-hand combat with each team in the migration path to
acting as overseers and ambassadors. They scaled to support more
migrations because there was less manual work for them to track in each
migration, and they could focus on the weird 20%. If, for example, we saw
that to complete a migration we needed to get a big customer storage
system upgraded and that work required a lot of coordination with the
customer team, we could deploy TPM support at this point to enable the
unblocking of another automatable tranche.
The goal of all of this is to treat TPMs as the rare specialists you bring in
when you can’t think of any other engineering-driven tricks that could make
the migrations either automatic or self-service on the part of the customer.
In our experience this will still mean you need to have folks with this skill
set on staff, but they should be the few that you all admire for their
discipline, attention to detail, and organizational savvy.

-- 545 of 630 --

Managing the Complexity of Shadow
Platforms
We discussed shadow platforms in Chapter 10, but as a reminder, they are
the duplicative platforms that application engineering teams sometimes
build for themselves. In general, shadow platforms increase the overall
complexity of the company’s software; however, they are usually built to
reduce the complexity for a particular area. Because of this local view, there
will always be some amount of platform work happening outside of your
platform team. The goal is not to restrict all of it, but to be aware of it.
Trying to stop every application engineering team from ever building
something that could be considered part of the platform remit is a fool’s
errand. At scale, it’s impossible. Moreover, it’s simply ill-advised to try to
halt all platform-related experimentation and innovation happening in teams
outside of your organization. These teams, as experts on their own needs,
will take a pioneering mindset to knocking down their problems. When
your platform fits their needs they will probably use it, but when there’s an
advantage for them to build their own thing, sometimes they will do just
that. In doing so, they might build the first draft of the next valuable
platform offering.
To wrangle those shadow platforms, you need to build on the trust that we
discussed in the previous chapter—that’s what keeps you in the loop. Being

-- 546 of 630 --

informed gives you the chance to prepare for whatever comes your way,
whether by embedding one of your engineers into the project, getting
regular updates from the team, or even setting up expectations about what
would need to happen in the future if this team decided they wanted you to
take over the project.
If and when you decide to take over a shadow platform, it’s important to
realize that you are inevitably going to create some new complexity in the
process. After all, you’re aiming to make it useful beyond the scope of its
original team, which usually means expanding its surface area. The trick at
this point is to reduce the pioneer-driven complexity while corralling the
new complexity within your platform team, rather than letting it leak out to
the users.

-- 547 of 630 --

AN EXAMPLE OF MANAGING A SHADOW PLATFORM
In our experience, a successfully dealt-with shadow platform looks more
like a well-managed mess than a black-and-white picture of great execution.
The following story illustrates just how iterative and messy success can turn
out to be.
About six months after Ian took over the second of five in-house compute
platforms, the CTO started pushing for AI for data science, giving
significant headcount to one of the business-facing technology executives to
execute this strategy. This executive then hired a leader for the initiative
who was a type that platform engineering leaders often cross swords with: a

-- 548 of 630 --

pioneering visionary eager for radical change. This new leader believed that
the barrier to AI innovation was the coupling to existing flawed (in his
mind) in-house platforms, which hindered data scientists from quickly
adopting cutting-edge public cloud and OSS systems. He aimed to create a
platform where each data scientist could have their own cloud account,
using whatever IaaS infrastructure primitives and OSS they wanted, like
they were at a small startup.
In handling this, Ian’s first mistake was assuming that everyone could see
how complex this would be, and that the pioneer would get this feedback
and quickly change course. After all, most of the data scientists could
barely administer their own development workstations, so individual cloud
environments were going to be a mess. Furthermore, most data scientists
were going to need an incredible amount of platform integration for their
existing workflows to be usable, and that was the work Ian’s org already
had planned. It was just going to take a while to do it “right” and avoid
unnecessary glue.
The pioneer, however, remained stubbornly on course and hired a team to
drive this effort, planning to build shadow platforms wherever Ian’s team
wouldn’t cooperate with his vision. He justified this by pointing out that
about 10% of the data scientists came from engineering backgrounds and
could handle the complexity of administering their own environments and
writing their own platform glue. Since this platform was only for
experimental work, which would need a rewrite to go into production, both

-- 549 of 630 --

the pioneer’s team and the early users believed it would be fine to deliver a
system that didn’t provide the same operational foundation as the broader
ones Ian’s team was providing. They figured they could deal with those
architectural issues later.
Once Ian realized that the original plan was going to stick, he began holding
regular meetings with the pioneer leader and his team. The goal was to get
serious about what it would take to increase the coverage of this platform
beyond the 10% of advanced users to include everyone else. These
meetings exposed the places where the pioneering team was overlooking
the complexity of scaling their offering. For example, they hadn’t thought
about how to migrate users off of existing systems (which would take
hundreds of developer years), or how to manage the administration for the
nontechnical users.
However, it was clear that the need to “make progress on AI” meant the
effort had backers up to and including the CTO. So, Ian had a choice: he
could let the pioneer team build a complex shadow platform without his
support, or he could figure out a compromise that would let him influence
the work to avoid some of the inevitable complexity.
The compromise he landed on was to shake up one of his teams’ roadmaps,
freeing up two developers to support this initiative. This was the upside of
the CTO’s attention—when other stakeholders questioned the changes, Ian
could tell them this was coming from the CTO’s priorities. The developers

-- 550 of 630 --

he chose were settler types, and he gave them a difficult remit: “Your job is
to not slow this project down, but to find the places where you can build the
right ‘long-term’ components and use the opportunity to build those earlier
than we would have.”
In practice, they succeeded about halfway; keeping the project moving
quickly was always going to mean creating some amount of glue that
wouldn’t scale. But even the half success was a positive thing, especially
because as the system became real, two things happened:
1. The 10% of data scientists who had previously been blocked could now
successfully access the cloud for iterative experimentation.
2. Now that they had something real to play with, some of the remaining
90% of data scientists were able to try the system, and Ian’s teams’
earlier concerns around the complexity of operations, administration, and
integration became obvious to everyone.
This didn’t immediately solve the standoff, and it took a couple of years of
reconciliation before the whole thing was sunset in favor of an integrated
platform. Still, in those two years the company was able to benefit from a
lot of innovation that otherwise would not have been possible. This became
a case study to show how the platform organization could partner with
application engineering teams without slowing them down, as opposed to
always being left out of the “scrappy” part of the cycle. All told, it was a

-- 551 of 630 --

successful example of partnering to create a better (and more sustainable)
product, as described in Chapter 5.
Managing Complexity by Controlling
Growth
Growth is addictive. When you have scaled out a platform team from its
early days to a stable organization, it can be tempting to think that the only
way to accomplish more is by adding more people to the mix. How else will
you ever close the gaps in the product offerings? You need a full set of
engineers to cover both development and the on-call rotation, a product
manager, and all of the supporting apparatus that a new team might need.
The only way to provide all of that is to grow and grow and grow.
The danger in this mindset is that unchecked growth contributes to the
complexity that you’re trying to avoid by building a platform. First, it
reduces appetite for managing complicated stuff: there’s a strong temptation
to throw bodies at problems instead of investing in automation or rethinking
the work. This then creates the kind of work that software engineers don’t
want to do: tedious on-call rotations where you are constantly doing manual
fixes, migrations that require human follow-up across the company, and
provisioning requests that take dozens of steps to complete. The longer you
go without investing in automation, the more likely you are to end up in

-- 552 of 630 --

situations where automation can’t do enough to manage the complexity, and
you’re stuck in a nonscalable staffing model just to keep up with support.
Growth also encourages complexity by removing the pressure to be smart
about what you build and where you invest. When engineers can justify any
pet project, they will often build without regard to what the customers need.
Managers and product managers in turn realize that it’s easier to build their
own empire rather than getting alignment with their peers on how to solve
problems. Growth gives everyone an excuse for why things aren’t quite
going well: another person to point the finger at, a newcomer who doesn’t
yet know how things work around here. In the worst case, you end up with
a sprawling portfolio of half-baked ideas and products that don’t quite fit
together well; a complex swamp of offerings for your customers to
navigate. And frankly, we’re not sold on platform teams being the
originators of many new initiatives. As we said in Part I, we expect most
innovation to come from the application teams building what they need, not
the platform team itself.
Even considering all of this, those of you who have spent your careers in
growing companies might think we’re off base to suggest slowing growth
when you aren’t being forced to do so. Why would you even pretend to do
new things when you’re barely keeping up with the rapid growth and
scaling of the company itself? And why would we push platform teams to
reduce growth when application engineering teams are just as guilty of
indulging in it?

-- 553 of 630 --

Remember, though, that there is a difference between platform teams and
application engineering teams: a platform team is more likely to be seen as
a “cost center” and therefore an area where efficiency is expected, rather
than a revenue-generating organization. Guiding a culture of smart
efficiency is part of the mandate for leaders in this space, and complexity is
the enemy of efficiency. The platform engineering mandate is not driving
efficiency through any means (say, outsourcing to manage the cost of
manual approaches). You achieve efficiency by strategically simplifying
through software engineering and product discovery.
We know that there are times when you need to grow, and entering new
product areas can be one of these times. If you have run your organization
so efficiently that you cannot pull from existing teams to cover a new
offering, you will need to grow. And of course, there are times of scaling
and company growth where expansion is sensible. But good platform
leaders understand that their platforms deliver leverage, and that means they
shouldn’t need to grow at the same rate as the overall engineering team,
once that leverage point is established.
As a guardrail, we recommend this rule of thumb: most of the new work in
established areas should be funded by existing people on those teams. This
forces management to sharpen their focus; if their KTLO workload has
gotten out of hand, can they find ways to reduce that cost? Do they have a
strong sense of the most important areas to work on, and are they divesting

-- 554 of 630 --

from adding to features that either are “good enough” or, worse, haven’t
shown their promised value?
Managing complexity implies not only that your platforms can support far
more users than the number of developers of the platform but also that,
once you have achieved baseline coverage for a product area, you do not
need to linearly scale the number of platform engineers for every new thing
you want to do in that space. This doesn’t mean you should cut yourself to
the bone and have no slack in your organization. This is why the
measurement of KTLO + mandates + operational improvements is so
important: knowing the minimum number of people you need to handle that
workload gives you the absolute bottom of your potential team size (which
is probably that number + 20% so everyone doesn’t immediately quit).
Above that baseline, you can exercise discretion and think about
investments. Being thoughtful about the next set of work, incorporating
customer demand, team demand, and your own strategic insights, and
getting the most out of the team you have before you go and ask for growth
is a sign of mature platform planning and leadership.
Managing Complexity Through Product
Discovery
Product discovery is the work of understanding customer demands and
creating, in the words of Silicon Valley Product Group, “a product solution

-- 555 of 630 --

to this problem that is usable, useful, and feasible.” Product discovery is not
just needed for the products you build from scratch; it is also an important
exercise to go through when you are creating platforms that are based
heavily on open source systems. If you want to create curated product
offerings, discovery is key. Yet under constant pressure of new potential
shadow platforms, many teams take customer demands literally, providing
whichever open source system the customer asks for without taking the
time to determine whether it is the right product solution for the overall
platform.
This leads to a common predicament, where teams that have provided (or,
more commonly, inherited) these open source systems are stuck with
operational complexity that grows linearly with the number of users and use
cases. You can reduce the coefficient of linearity with investments in
automation, but from a design perspective, most major open source
products have too wide a surface area exposed to the users. This is most
evident in distributed OSS for data processing, such as RDBMSs
(PostgreSQL, MySQL), Cassandra, MongoDB, and Kafka. These systems
are highly complex by nature, and the OSS vendor model drives them to
compete with one another by adding more and more features, which means
they have very broad interfaces.
Some leaders immediately jump to the conclusion that they have to
standardize and limit choices in order to manage this challenge. That’s a
great idea, but how do you do it? In our experience, while application

-- 556 of 630 --

developers on the whole may agree that fewer infrastructure choices would
make their lives easier, they rarely agree on what the limited set of choices
should be. If you’re disciplined (and have senior leadership support), you
may be able to establish standards early enough to avoid annoying your
customers by taking away features they’re already using and forcing
migrations to reduce duplication. But this can backfire if it slows
application teams down much, and it’s politically unpopular. Most of the
time standardization happens only when the platform team hits a breaking
point, where the support burden of so many OSS offerings prompts the
question of why you need so many in the first place.
There’s an option in between “let a thousand flowers bloom, until you can’t
stand it anymore” and “offer a strict platform that allows for very little
variation,” and, as you might have guessed, it involves your product culture.
To do this, you need to take the time to understand your customers. Explore
why teams are using their chosen tools, whether it’s out of habit or for
specific must-have features. Through an iterative process of product
discovery, you can develop the insight needed to curate your offerings,
reduce complexity, and better meet your customer needs. In our final story,
we will walk through just such an exercise and the many iterations that led
to success.
Tying It Together: Balancing Internal and
External Complexity
2

-- 557 of 630 --

In this story, Ian had a team of about 10 people who owned a collection of
OSS systems (PostgreSQL, Kafka, and Cassandra). The team followed a
data reliability engineering (DRE) approach, which meant they offered a
“platform” that provided all of the support and provisioning for these
systems, with the team’s proactive engineering spent on automation,
particularly around resilience and autoscaling.
Burning Out on OSS Operations
As we predicted in Part I, this approach to platform delivery wasn’t scaling.
Each OSS system had a large feature surface area, and the complexity of
operating that as a company foundation led to constant operational strain.
Even with two pager rotations, the number of high-severity incidents a
week was much closer to 50 than 5, and this was only somewhat
ameliorated by the fact that rotations could follow the sun. The DRE team
had reached the limits of efficiencies that could come from automation
alone.
Unfortunately, the application teams weren’t seeing this pain; indeed, they
were happy with the flexibility provided by the OSS systems’ extensive
feature set. Their primary demand was that the DRE teams should expand
their portfolio with more offerings. But when the DRE leaders tried to
explain that they needed twice as many engineers to sustainably manage the
existing workload before they could even think of adding more offerings,
they were met with disbelief. The DRE team could continue to grow only
3

-- 558 of 630 --

by agreeing to support more systems and configurations, which they knew
would quickly arrive at the same unsustainable scaling point.
Trying (and Failing) to Change the Game
This impasse prompted the team to make several attempts at reducing the
complexity they had to manage. The first attempt to change the model was
trying to get out of the game altogether and move to vendor “hosted open
source” IaaS implementations, where application teams would own their
own operations. In another company, putting the operational load on the
vendor might have solved the problem. But due to the multicloud
requirements of this company, the differences across vendors made it too
hard for the application teams to operate themselves. This was only truly
appreciated after the vendor offerings were rolled out, when the DRE team
was still constantly being paged to handle acute operational issues because
the application teams lacked the depth to debug them. At this point, they
realized “get out of the game” really meant “stay in the game, but as an
operations team.”
The next tactic was to take a page from the SRE book and try to improve
things through SLA documentation. The idea was to provide clear
documentation of what the team could and could not support within its
SLA; this would help application teams understand that their bespoke
configurations couldn’t be supported by the DRE team alone and lead to a
shared operational model. The DRE team saw this as a rational

-- 559 of 630 --

compromise, balancing customers’ needs for customization with their
ability to manage these at scale. But it sounded like a lawyerly abdication of
responsibility to those customers, who saw the team as using rules and
processes to position themselves as advisors and evangelists rather than
owners. Ian brokered a top-down handover for one of the biggest
customers, forcing trade-offs on both sides, but it was clear that this
approach wasn’t going to be sustainable without constant conflict and
politics.
The team turned next to a software-based approach: full encapsulation. We
described this in Part I: creating a service API layer that fully encapsulates
the open source APIs, which allows the platform team full control over
what they support/operate. The users were not particularly interested in
giving up their direct access to the data stores in favor of this option, but the
team hit on the idea of tying this to a feature supporting multiregion reads
and writes with simple (key, value) semantics. Early customers were
satisfied, but as the platform team looked for the next tranche of potential
customers, they realized that no one else was interested in the multiregion
use cases in the short term, and instead they wanted a full SQL interface. So
the team started creating a plan for adding secondary indices, with a view to
eventually supporting SQL semantics. At this point Ian stepped in, noting
that the idea of building their own in-house global SQL database was less
thinking big and more of an impossible dream.

-- 560 of 630 --

Shadow Platforms Force a Reset
During the time these three attempts were being made, frustrated
application teams had started building shadow platforms to get the features
they needed, such as MongoDB for document support and FoundationDB
for transactional write semantics that could horizontally scale. These had
the usual characteristics: when the application team was growing rapidly
they were happy to own all the operations, but as the initial engineers
moved on and the operational load kept growing, the application teams
were eager to offload them onto the platform team. Adding more OSS to the
portfolio was the opposite direction of where the team wanted to go, but
there was something here that the company needed, and Ian challenged his
team to figure out how to meet those needs.
At this point, the team did a reset by bringing in some managers who had
experience building product-oriented infrastructure. These managers started
by doing product discovery, looking across the collection of offerings and,
using their prior experience to guide them, investigating what the
application teams actually needed from these systems. That is, they
attempted to discover what the teams specifically required, as opposed to
just preferred, in Cassandra, MongoDB, PostgreSQL, Kafka, and
FoundationDB. With this understanding, the platform team sought to
identify a narrower surface area of common needs that could be used to
remove one or two of the broader offerings. Through this effort, they found
two major opportunities:

-- 561 of 630 --

Simplification
There was a lot of demand for a cross-application configuration
platform for which (key, value) semantics were fine. Here, the team
leveraged the shadow platform investment in FoundationDB to
power a managed service focused only on solving this use case.
Coupling multiple primitives
There was still a demand for something schema-aware, but product
discovery revealed that this requirement was as much about caching
and search as it was about ACID transactions. The team realized if
they combined PostgreSQL with searchability and caching
functionality, they could offer a more limited SQL system that would
satisfy most customers.
They also realized that if they could succeed on these two projects, then
both a platform (Cassandra) and a shadow platform (MongoDB) could be
sunset.
Executing on the Reset
To create these new platforms, the team collaborated closely with
application teams that had pressing demands for the offerings. The result
was rapid development of platforms that, while scrappy, satisfied these
customers and turned them into advocates for the work throughout the

-- 562 of 630 --

company. Thanks to the early successes, a long list of application teams
signed up to onboard as the platforms matured.
In all, it took about four years of iteration to identify the right product
offering that would meet the major application needs while limiting the
complexity for the platform team, meaning their growth could be controlled
without ceding all future feature development to shadow platforms. You
may be wondering whether a process that involved three false starts and a
multiyear migration is really a success. But this is the reality of delivering
platforms that manage your company’s unique complexity: they will
evolve, trade-offs are hard, and sometimes the best solution isn’t even
viable at the time you identify the problem. Don’t be afraid to keep
iterating.
Wrapping Up
Alignment and trust are challenging but achievable goals for your platform
team. Managing complexity, on the other hand, is a North Star that you’ll
use to guide your organization, but it’s unlikely you will ever fully
accomplish this task. There are things you can do to detect complexity, and
practices you can use to help control it, but complexity will always be there.
That doesn’t mean you should throw your hands up and give up on the task
entirely. When you find complexity in excessive human coordination or
shadow platforms, see it as an opportunity to develop new ways to
4

-- 563 of 630 --

automate, simplify, and understand the needs of your customers. As your
platform organization develops and matures, use this North Star to remind
yourself that too much growth too fast can make it that much harder to keep
complexity in check, and that the iterative process of product discovery is
critical to finding the simplest scalable solution among the sea of more
complex options. The more time you are able to spend thinking about and
driving down complexity for your users, the more mature your platform
will become.
This is reminiscent of the challenges in wrapping vendor/OSS APIs for internal use, only arguably
worse, as you not only have to keep up with API changes but also must keep up with UI/UX changes.
See Peter Siebel’s article “Let a 1,000 Flowers Bloom. Then Rip 999 of Them Out by the Roots”.
See Database Reliability Engineering by Laine Campbell and Charity Majors (O’Reilly).
We would be remiss not to be honest about the cost of this change: at the time of writing, the team is
in the second year of a five-year plan to fully deprecate the MongoDB and Cassandra offerings.
1
2
3
4

-- 564 of 630 --

Chapter 14. Your Platforms Are Loved
What’s love got to do, got to do with it? What’s love, but a second-
hand emotion?
—Tina Turner
We know a head of platform product management who boils his key metrics
down to “simpler, faster, cheaper, and your users love it.” This usually
prompts two questions. The first is what Tina Turner asks in this chapter’s
opening quote, which we think is a totally legitimate question: why should it
be a goal for a system targeted at internal engineers to be done so well that
users love using it? “Love” implies that you are appealing to your users’
emotions. This is important for a company selling products and looking to
establish brand affinity so users will keep buying them, but is it really
something for an internal platform to aspire toward?
That ties into the second question: is winning platform users’ love worth the
cost? Massive tech companies can build bespoke internal tools that their
employees rave about for years afterward (yes, we are talking about you,
people from Google and Netflix), but few of us can spend that much effort
and time optimizing for our users’ needs—it just doesn’t seem to make
economic sense unless you’re a massive technology business that has
margins to match.

-- 565 of 630 --

To answer both questions, it’s worth reflecting on the everyday tools you
love: things you use in the garage, kitchen, bathroom, etc. Rarely are they
the most expensive tools on the market. Rarely are they the ones that try to
be all things to all people. Instead, they are made with care for a specific
purpose that matches your needs. You love them because they work well
and bring pleasure to getting the job done. When we talk about platforms
that inspire love, this is what we mean. For internal platforms, “love” is a
good proxy for improving productivity.
Why not just talk about productivity? Well, for one thing, we have yet to
find a good way to objectively measure engineering productivity that fits
even most circumstances, let alone all of them. When we instead end up
focusing on simplistic metrics like “adoption” or “efficiency,” we start to
see our job as eliminating complexity, as opposed to managing it, and this
almost always leads to building systems that are easier for the platform
teams to control, instead of systems that application teams love to use. Oscar
Wilde once said a cynic is someone who “knows the price of everything but
the value of nothing,” and so we emphasize “love” to remind you that
success is not as simple as improving a number.
Luckily, our experience is that inspiring love by building tools that are
enjoyable to use is something that every team can strive for. In this chapter,
we’ll share some examples of platforms that we have seen be loved and why
we think they succeeded. We’ll also discuss why you have to be careful with
simplistic metrics when trying to capture love.

-- 566 of 630 --



-- 567 of 630 --

A SUCCESS RED HERRING: LIES, DAMN LIES, AND CSAT SCORES
Many platform teams run customer satisfaction surveys as one of their key
metrics-gathering exercises. One common metric in these surveys is the
customer satisfaction score. With that as a target, you might think you have
the ultimate tool for determining how much your platforms are loved, and
thus successful, in the sense that people who are satisfied feel they have a
good tool for the job.
We’ve run these surveys across our platforms, and we’ve found that they’ve
provided some interesting baseline information, and some red herrings. So,
before you go out with a CSAT survey, consider:
Are you getting a good sample population?
Nothing will cause you to lose trust faster than bragging about your
customer satisfaction survey results when you had a very low
response rate. If you want to run this kind of survey, you need to
ensure you are getting a good response rate from your target
audience, not just relying on the few people who bother to fill it out.
Surveys can fail by being attractive to the least satisfied and most
vocal target group, or by getting such a low response rate that your
own organization can skew the results. Don’t lie through virtue of
your sample population. If you have a small user base, do everything
in your power to get the highest response rate possible. If you have a
large user base, aim to get representative responses from each major
user group, whether that is determined by their area of the

-- 568 of 630 --

organization, type of role, frequency of use, or what have you. When
you share your survey results, be honest about the response rates,
where they came from, and any gaps you might have in your survey
coverage.
Would you change your work based on the survey results?
If you ask people in a survey which products they are least satisfied
with, what areas they would like to see investment in, or other types
of questions that lead them to believe that you might actually change
your focus based on their responses, make sure you are actually
willing to do that. Filling out a survey year after year where they
complain about the same system or ask for the same feature and see
no action is likely to make your customers feel even worse about
your team than they did before the survey.
Did you try to manipulate responders, or are you actually interested in
their feedback?
Presenting users with a biased survey that makes your pet project
sound like the best way forward is a tactic you could use, but we beg
you not to do that. This survey should be used to figure out what
people actually want, not to manipulate them into providing cover for
your pre-canned decisions.
Is there realistically something you can deliver based on the responses?

-- 569 of 630 --

Similarly, if you give people a bunch of options that all sound good,
and they respond with enthusiasm to all of your ideas, could you
actually deliver all of those things? Again, be realistic. Instead of
asking people whether they would like each of a long list of good
things, ask for rankings.
Now, with all of that said, a good customer survey can provide a lot of
valuable insights and support. Sometimes, a survey will express just how
frustrated a large part of your customer population is with a system. We’ve
seen surveys that made platform teams realize that the instability they
thought was a bit of a problem was actually a really big problem that many
people were painfully aware of. It’s one thing to know you are having some
stability and performance issues, and another thing to have overwhelming
responses from people who were not otherwise complaining, making it clear
you are causing them pain! And on the flip side, surveys can point out the
offerings that people love and that need to be protected.
Surveys can also provide cover for making big changes that may cause
short-term pain. In one instance, we saw regular complaints about our code
review process, providing a clear signal that users were dissatisfied with the
tool we had to offer. Changing the tool required a large migration effort, but
through a combination of planning, communication, and the backing
evidence of the pain reported in surveys, we were able to show users that we
were doing this work exactly in response to their complaints about the old
system.

-- 570 of 630 --

Surveys (and similar qualitative data) are a valid part of your toolkit, but one
you should deploy as rigorously as possible. Plan your questions
thoughtfully, get a good sample size, and think about what changes you
might realistically make based on the results. If you misuse your surveys,
they will lose all of their value, as people will stop responding to them or
ignore their results. No one is interested in a survey that changes nothing, is
used to cover up bad experiences they know are happening, or generally
doesn’t seem to reflect their view of reality.
Love Just Works
Ian’s most-loved platform from his 11 years as a hands-on engineer was the
deployment platform at Amazon, called Apollo. Amazon is, of course, a
massive tech company, so you might think we’re cheating with this
example. However, the Apollo system was built relatively early in the
company’s history, around 2004, and Ian started using it in 2006. Apollo
predated containers, but in essence it was doing similar things to modern
container-based deployment systems—laying down binaries on the
filesystem, then starting and terminating processes to make the binaries run.
While it wasn’t perfect, the overwhelming experience was that it just
worked. The elements that made it work at Amazon’s then 5,000-engineer
scale were:

-- 571 of 630 --

Great UI and automation interfaces
It was very clear that the UI was not an afterthought that had been
tacked onto the underlying entity or system model, and the users
never questioned whether the UI was actually showing the true state
of the underlying system. Everything that the system was capable of
doing could also be done through the API and be observed by the
API. Apollo dated back before the “automation as configuration”
movement, so all the automation came from rich command-line
scripting, but the team had put in the work so it was very easy to
script multiple actions and avoid the “clickops” trap.
Strong opinionation
Apollo had strong “paved path” opinionation on what a release
looked like for files laid down on the host machine, and on what a
release process looked like. These choices did cause issues for the tail
20% of systems with special needs, but for the other 80%, they “just
worked.” It was very easy to set up a release for a new application,
and the processes were the same from one team to the next even
when their application structures were totally different (say, an offline
batch process versus an online service).
Pierceable opinionation
To support the remaining 20%, the platform did offer one significant
point to “pierce” the abstraction. When a release was started, it had a

-- 572 of 630 --

workflow that allowed users to execute arbitrary scripts on the
deployed host. This meant that when you had an application with
special needs (for example, Ian had a service that had to do a ~10-
minute handover of state between old and new processes, which was
not ideal and also not something he could reengineer quickly) you
could develop Linux scripts to make it work. So, while you
sometimes hit these edges of opinionation and had to write glue, you
never felt trapped with no options.
Ian loved using this tool and used it for over seven years, across a wide
variety of software. It earned its place as his favorite platform because it
took complicated needs and built the interfaces to make things just work.
Love Can Look Like a Hack
The product that Ian’s platform team developed that was most loved by
users was one of the five competing compute platforms we referred to in
Chapter 11, called Waiter. Waiter was a classic pioneer offering, built
alongside the application teams who built tools for data scientists. Thanks to
this close collaboration with the users, Waiter was beloved because it was
tailored to give them exactly what they wanted, even when the
implementation details used to get there sometimes looked like hacks to
other platform engineers.

-- 573 of 630 --

The main reason Waiter was successful was its focus on eliminating user
friction. The pioneer builders cared about productivity not only for the
application developers, but also for the data scientists calling into the
applications as they iteratively developed their code. The major innovation
was a “run as” feature—the workload would run as the same Unix account
as its caller, inheriting access and entitlements. Technically, this required a
complex and somewhat hacky coupling of the load balancer (to intercept
incoming application calls) to an orchestrator that could spin up application
processes with the right account. But it meant that the callers of those
applications could very simply reason about what downstream resources the
application would have access to. This was hugely important for
applications targeting data scientists, because the application teams could
give them access to the application and not have to worry about managing
the permissions for the data, since the application would run as the human
caller and only have access to whatever that human was supposed to see. It
also eliminated the massive pain of debugging cases where it worked on
someone’s developer workstation but not in the production environment.
Eventually, the pioneer team handed the system off to a platform team of
settlers, who kept the core culture of “productivity first” as they evolved it
to be more scalable. Any time they found a gap between development and
production experience, their mission was to make this user friction go away,
even if it meant more “hacky” complexity in their implementation. Harking
back to the last chapter, they saw their mission as managing complexity on
behalf of their users, not eliminating it.

-- 574 of 630 --

Beyond Waiter, some other beloved hack systems we’ve seen include a
service library that would spin up an in-process instance of the remote
system if it couldn’t find one running (terrifying and brilliant!) and a
command-line process that would run any binary built by a monorepo
whether or not it had been deployed to that machine, pulling down artifacts
on demand to support starting the necessary process. They had pioneer
fingerprints all over them: systems built by people looking to power through
a problem and make something easier for everyone, but not necessarily
thinking about what this would all mean at larger scale. While these systems
had many ugly edge cases, they all had a shared quality of brilliance; they
took a problem that most users didn’t want to have to think about at all and
made it go away.
When you find yourself inheriting these kinds of systems, it can be tempting
to decide you need to get rid of them or change them completely due to their
deficiencies and the pain they cause the platform team itself. We get it, but
we recommend that you first try to understand which of the weird inherited
systems people love (through, among other things, customer satisfaction
surveys) and why they love them before you plan major changes.
Love Can Be Obvious
One of the most-loved platforms Camille’s organization developed and
launched was an internal version of S3. Yes, you read that right—something

-- 575 of 630 --

as simple as an internal blob store was loved. This company was mostly on-
prem at the time, and while they had several good internal storage offerings,
there was no S3-compatible object store. No one was demanding such an
offering, but the product manager for the storage team had a strong belief
that they just needed to make this available and everyone would start using
it. He saw the widespread external value of S3, particularly among
engineers in the data science space, and was confident that it would provide
significant value to the user population. And he was right! It was a wildly
popular offering, with massive adoption soon after launch.
This probably seems like an obvious outcome; after all, S3 is one of the
most successful innovations from AWS. But just because some technology
is popular in the larger world doesn’t mean it will be embraced in your
organization—sometimes popular tech flops when brought into a company.
When weighing whether to bring something in, how can you most
accurately predict whether it’s likely to be a success or a failure? It comes
down to a few underlying factors that are important in building products that
people love, and that you can’t just take for granted even when you’re
following a trend:
Awareness
When people not only know about a product but know how to use the
product, you’re in good shape. That’s the advantage with something
like S3: many of the developers had experience using it either in
college or at other companies, so there was no need to explain the

-- 576 of 630 --

value proposition to them. The platform team also did a good job of
getting the word out about the product through the customer teams,
so they knew when it was available.
Compatibility
In this case, S3 had another advantage: it was already supported by
many of the tools in use by engineers and data scientists, so most of
the implementation work was wrapping the internal authentication
protocol and making efficiency tweaks, rather than having to think
through every possible client implementation. A common pitfall of
introducing popular external technology into a company ecosystem is
that the work it takes to actually integrate that technology with the
existing software outweighs the incremental value of the new
technology. In this case, the team anticipated and avoided that pitfall
by investing in the integrations early and delivering a good user
experience out of the box.
Engineering quality
Reiterating a common theme of this book, if this product had been
unstable when it was launched, it might not have gotten the
immediate wide adoption it did. People love things that just work,
especially when they’re using them for critical production workloads.
Since this platform was built on top of production-hardened
components, it was much easier to get to a stable offering.

-- 577 of 630 --

Time to market
Some of the love this product generated came from the fact that it
went from product insight to launch much faster than most major
offerings—in this case, there was less than a year between the
product manager starting research and an alpha release that included
most client integrations. This was thanks to the fact that the platform
was built on top of existing components, it didn’t require anyone to
do a big migration to start using it, and it didn’t need a lot of new
documentation, integration, or customer tooling. Drafting off the
success and popularity that Amazon had created meant less product
work, and reusing internal components meant much less engineering
complexity. As we mentioned in Chapter 13, people will forget the
pain of late delivery when you deliver something great, but it still
feels very good to deliver something that is both great and ships
quickly.
This may not sound like a piece of brilliant product management, but few
have the sense to perceive the confluence of awareness, compatibility, and
engineering foundation that can be turned into a fast, high-value product
win. When it all comes together like this, love is quick to follow.
Tying It Together: Love Makes Your
Users Awesome

-- 578 of 630 --

Smruti Patel, VP of engineering at Apollo GraphQL, has built platforms for
20+ years. We asked her to share a story of building a platform that users
love, and key strategies for making users awesome and autonomous. What
follows is from Smruti.

-- 579 of 630 --

P L AT F O R M P E R S P E C T I V E S

-- 580 of 630 --

THE PROBLEM
We had a monolith with undesirable dependencies due to years of accrued
tech debt. In our developer productivity surveys, we would routinely have
users sharing concerns around not being able to confidently know what
changes were running in production. We also saw how this would then
manifest in incidents due to accidentally rolling out breaking changes to
production.
So, we decided to build a service delivery platform. We were clear about our
purpose: make the product engineering teams a lot more productive (reduce
the lead times for feature delivery by over 50%) and make change
management safer.
THE APPROACH
We intentionally brought a product mindset to the platform, defining our
user personas and their jobs to be done. Here, I’ve routinely found it most
valuable to focus on 10 super-delighted users, versus 1,000 who are partially
satisfied with what we have to offer.
Building delightful user experiences and making users awesome requires us
to deeply understand their workflows and the toolkit we can offer in
addition to the platform. What are the gardened/paved paths? What are the
guardrails baked into the platform? What escape hatches do we need to
provide? The goal is for the users to find it easy to do what is right, and hard
to do what is wrong.

-- 581 of 630 --

When we’ve done this user analysis correctly and understand our personas’
skill sets, strengths, and pain points, then using the platform feels like
wielding a Swiss army knife with a variety of tools at hand specific to the
need, the occasion, and the gradual maturity of the user. For the last, I think
about it in terms of progressive disclosure or looking at the solution in terms
of layers. Platforms are for developers, and as you’re abstracting away some
complexity, you will always have some developer who is curious enough to
peel the onion, look under the hood, and tinker around to suit their own
unique needs. A successful platform should offer programmable and
composable building blocks for that class of developers.
A year in, we had less than 5% of production traffic on our platform. Not
only that, we now had the dual cost of maintaining two delivery platforms:
the new one, which was not yet at feature parity, and the old one, which
continued to see scaled usage. Net-net, we were far worse off than when
we’d started 18 months ago!
We realized that we had left the adoption of the platform to a “build it and
they’ll come” mindset. We had not been intentional about how our platform
would get adopted and the level of investment we were expecting the
organization to take on once the platform was shipped. Consequently, we
couldn’t land the impact we sought—our work wasn’t “done” once the
platform was built out.

-- 582 of 630 --

To fix this, we built a detailed migration strategy, accounting for the off-
ramp from the old platform and the on-ramp onto the new platform. We
found that we had to build out an A/B testing tool so that our developers
could incrementally dial up the traffic from the old to the new platform,
while promising ~zero downtime throughout the migration.
About a year later, 100% of our services had migrated over, and every new
service started onboarding directly onto this platform. Our average lead
times for feature delivery reduced not just by 50%, but by 65%, and we saw
far fewer breaking changes in production.
KEY TAKEAWAYS
The highest leverage a successful platform can provide to an organization is
by driving velocity for its users, bringing delight to its users, and making its
users awesome at what they do. This not only requires bringing a product
mindset to building a platform, but also shifting away from the “build it and
they’ll come” mindset to a more intentional, focused objective around day
zero adoption.
Wrapping Up: What Is Love? Baby
Don’t Hurt Me

-- 583 of 630 --

Joking aside, love is hard. Most of the time we’re lucky to have products
that fade into the background, where people may not express love, but they
don’t express constant pain and frustration either. Smruti Patel once gave a
talk where she advised that a good platform was a multitool, boring but
useful, not a mystery mushroom where you think you’ll have fun using it,
but you’re always a little nervous that you might have a bad to deadly
experience. Most of our platforms will be boring but useful; they might not
be fun, but users can trust them to do what they expect.
One of the most overall successful platforms we’ve seen was a distributed
job scheduler, built in the early days of a company. The platform had
evolved and grown as the company had evolved and grown, doing what it
needed to do, making incremental improvements and occasionally getting
serious investment to ensure it could deliver the reliability guarantees of
such a critical system. Over the years, many people looked at this ugly
legacy system and proposed replacing it with something newer, fancier,
more full-featured—Airflow, Luigi, or whatever the flavor of the day might
be. These attempts were well-meaning but never got adoption outside of a
few specialty systems. In the meantime, the job scheduler chugged on, often
with only a skeleton crew for support. That’s another lesson of platforms;
even the best are sometimes underappreciated.
If you want to replace a successful but neglected platform with something
you believe will go beyond acceptance and get to love, don’t neglect the
hard work we discussed in Chapters 7, 8, and 9. Be sure you have a plan to

-- 584 of 630 --

know what features of the existing system are in use, either rearchitect to
decouple some of the tight integrations or reimplement them in the
replacement system, dual-write to ensure you’re at least meeting feature
compatibility, and plan a careful migration. If it seems strange to end a
chapter on love with a bunch of reminders about details, planning, and
diligence, remember that this is platform engineering, and love in this world
requires a strong baseline of trust before it can fully take hold.

-- 585 of 630 --

Concluding Remarks
A question we asked ourselves before writing this book was whether
platform engineering is just a fad, like many others that have swept the
industry over the last 25 years. And while we hope that the ~100,000 words
we’ve written on the subject have convinced you otherwise, we still see a
real risk of platform engineering falling victim to the tech hype cycle. With
vendors pushing specific implementation details and consultants writing
checklists, we’re in danger of losing all nuance in favor of some metrics for
an executive’s dashboard.
That’s why we spent so much time in Part I talking about the inflection
point of complexity that the industry is facing today. While the cloud,
vendor, and OSS ecosystems have accelerated technical innovation where
it’s demanded by the business (in 2024, it’s anything related to AI), they
haven’t made software systems any simpler than they were in the ’90s with
servers as pets and proprietary vendor platforms. The frustration has shifted
from dealing with data center engineers to grappling with the copy-and-
paste nature of Terraform “codebases,” but the complexity remains. In fact,
with the continual push for innovation and the need to integrate legacy
systems, the overall complexity has grown, leading to the over-generalized
swamp we discussed back in Chapter 1.
1

-- 586 of 630 --

The industry needs to move past seeing platforms as either hype cycle
implementation details (such as IDPs ) or the ad hoc glue that today’s hot
application team uses to stick together their vendor and OSS systems
without considering future costs. Getting past these expedient approaches
(and convincing application teams to come along) requires balancing the
things we covered in Part II, like:
Creating teams of engineers with a mix of software and systems focus
and specialties
Mixing product, engineering, and operational perspectives in answering
the question of what the right thing for the team to work on is
Delivering by combining an Agile approach with more rigorous planning
as needed
Spending much more engineering time rearchitecting and migrating from
old systems than just building new ones
Managing this balance is not easy. Potential failure is around every corner,
and even your successes will constantly be critiqued, by your team, your
peers, your stakeholders, even your leadership—all of whom have only a
partial view of what you are keeping in balance. We showed some examples
of what success looks like in Part III, and as you saw, even the successes
had plenty of moments of frustration along the path. But then, we became
engineers to solve hard problems, and solving hard problems is inherently
frustrating—otherwise, they wouldn’t be hard problems. We try to
remember that frustrations bring opportunities for humility and growth.
2

-- 587 of 630 --

And that brings us back to why we, Ian and Camille, keep doing this,
despite all of the challenges. Firstly, it’s just an honest love of technology at
the nuts and bolts level, and of the power of using software to solve big
problems. There’s also the love of understanding complex systems, be they
technical or human, and using that knowledge to improve them. And
finally, we believe that the industry can do better, should do better, and must
do better at wrangling complexity and making it easier for engineers to get
their jobs done.
Everyone who has read this far shares these qualities, too. Use them to
become better platform engineering leaders, and bring together people with
diverse skills and perspectives from inside and outside your teams to build
the platforms that your company needs—even when they’re fighting against
you. The true mark of a platform leader is the ability to turn friction into
opportunity, forging ahead to create systems that are greater than the sum of
their parts. Lead with resilience, empathy, and vision, and you’ll transform
skeptics into believers.
Not naming names.
Yes, this is a dig. Why are so many of the top 10 search results for platform engineering talking
about an implementation detail? We’re not sure, but we’re pretty sure that’s just a fad.
1
2

-- 588 of 630 --

Index
A
acceptance tests, Architect for Transparent Migrations
adoption metrics, for platform alignment, Your Platforms Are Aligned
Amazon “away team” model, Merging roadmaps of platform teams
API/schema registries, Integrating Metadata Registries
architecture security, Addressing Security with Architecture-Addressing
Security with Architecture
paved paths for default security, Addressing Security with
Architecture-Addressing Security with Architecture
security hazard reduction, Addressing Security with Architecture-
Addressing Security with Architecture
automated continuous deployment, in ad hoc small scale platform
cooperation, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
B
Bottcher, Evan, Defining “Platform” and Other Important Terms
bottom-up roadmap planning
“keep the lights on” work, “Keep the Lights On” Work
mandates, Mandates
planning cycles
cadence, Cadence

-- 589 of 630 --

list merging, Merging lists
roadmap merging, Merging roadmaps of platform teams
system improvements
efficiency and performance, Efficiency and performance
improvements-Efficiency and performance improvements
reliability and operability, Reliability and operability
improvements-Reliability and operability improvements
security and compliance, Security and compliance improvements
branch-based deployments, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale
Brooker, Marc, Clarifying Goals and Requirements in a Proposal
Document
Brooks, Fred, Why Rearchitecting Is Preferred to Building a v2
building blocks, Tying It Together: The Case of the Overcoupled
Platform
C
cadence, in planning cycles, Cadence
CD (continuous deployment), in ad hoc small scale platform
cooperation, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
change management, Change Management-Change Management
chaos testing, Architect for Transparent Migrations
CI (continuous integration) platforms, Alignment to Purpose

-- 590 of 630 --

complexity management, Your Platforms Manage Complexity-Wrapping
Up
accidental complexity of human coordination, Managing the
Accidental Complexity of Human Coordination-Managing the
Accidental Complexity of Human Coordination
balancing internal and external complexity, Tying It Together:
Balancing Internal and External Complexity-Executing on the Reset
game change, Trying (and Failing) to Change the Game
OSS operations, Burning Out on OSS Operations
reset execution, Executing on the Reset
shadow platform reset, Shadow Platforms Force a Reset
growth control, Managing Complexity by Controlling Growth-
Managing Complexity by Controlling Growth
migration complexity, Managing the Accidental Complexity of
Human Coordination-Managing the Accidental Complexity of
Human Coordination
product discovery, Managing Complexity Through Product Discovery
shadow platforms, Managing the Complexity of Shadow Platforms-
Managing the Complexity of Shadow Platforms
single pane of glass concept, Your Platforms Manage Complexity-
Your Platforms Manage Complexity
continuous deployment (CD), in ad hoc small scale platform
cooperation, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
continuous integration (CI) platforms, Alignment to Purpose

-- 591 of 630 --

cross-platform architecture, with independent lead ICs, Foster Cross-
Platform Architecture with Independent Lead ICs
cross-platform thinking, Foster Cross-Platform Thinking with
Independent Product Management
culture change, Your Whole Engineering Culture Has to Change
customer advisory boards, Scale Up with Interlock Meetings and
Customer Advisory Boards
customer engagement, Product Culture Focuses on the Customer,
Empathizing with Customers
customer focus, Product Culture Focuses on the Customer-Escaping the
Feature Shop Trap to Serve Customers More Broadly
characteristics of internal customers, Characteristics of Internal
Customers-Characteristics of Internal Customers
collaborating with internal customers, Collaborating with Internal
Customers-Collaborating with Internal Customers
customer engagement, Characteristics of Internal Customers-
Characteristics of Internal Customers
empathizing with customers, Empathizing with Customers-
Empathizing with Customers
feature shop trap, Escaping the Feature Shop Trap to Serve Customers
More Broadly-Escaping the Feature Shop Trap to Serve Customers
More Broadly
incremental delivery and proofs of concept, Partner to prototype

-- 592 of 630 --

stakeholder management versus product management, Collaborating
with Internal Customers
customer support, Accept That Your Team Will Spend More Time
Talking to Customers and Less Time Writing Code
customer surveys, Seek Feedback from Comments in Platform-wide
Customer Surveys, Your Platforms Are Loved-Your Platforms Are
Loved
customer understanding, Synthetic Monitoring
customer-facing product roadmaps, The Customer-Facing Roadmap
D
developer advocates, Developer Advocates, Technical Writers, and
Support Engineers
Dunbar’s number, Creating the Platform Teams That Replace
Cooperation
E
empowerment of teams, Empowering Teams to Focus on Building
Platforms-Empowering Teams to Focus on Building Platforms
end-to-end monitoring, Synthetic Monitoring
engineering support organizations (ESO), Stage 4: At Scale with an
Engineering Support Organization-Stage 4: At Scale with an
Engineering Support Organization

-- 593 of 630 --

error budgets, SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets Are
Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets Are Optional
F
feature flagging, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
FinOps, Efficiency and performance improvements-Efficiency and
performance improvements
foundational offerings operation
operational discipline, Operational Discipline
platform responsibilities, Responsibility for the Full Platform
platform support, Supporting the Platform
framework platforms, Responsibility for the Full Platform
G
generative AI, Operational Discipline-Operational Discipline
guardrails, Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers
I
IaaS (infrastructure as a service), Change #1: Explosion of Choice
Icicle team, Gaining Trust Requires Flexibility on What Is “Right”
IDPs (internal developer portals), Integrating Metadata Registries
immediate adoption, What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?

-- 594 of 630 --

independent contributors (ICs), cross-platform architecture with, Foster
Cross-Platform Architecture with Independent Lead ICs
infrastructure as a service (IaaS), Change #1: Explosion of Choice
innersourcing, Merging roadmaps of platform teams-Merging roadmaps
of platform teams
innovation support, Empowering Teams to Focus on Building Platforms-
Empowering Teams to Focus on Building Platforms
interlock meetings, Scale Up with Interlock Meetings and Customer
Advisory Boards
internal customers
characteristics, Characteristics of Internal Customers-Characteristics
of Internal Customers
collaboration, Collaborating with Internal Customers-Collaborating
with Internal Customers
internal developer portals (IDPs), Integrating Metadata Registries
K
“keep the lights on” work, in bottom-up roadmap planning, “Keep the
Lights On” Work
Kubernetes, Change #1: Explosion of Choice, Look for products with
realistic paths to adoption, Look to big bets around OSS and vendor
systems
L

-- 595 of 630 --

Lamport, Leslie, Clarifying Goals and Requirements in a Proposal
Document
leverage, Defining “Platform” and Other Important Terms
list merging, Merging lists
loved platforms, Your Platforms Are Loved-Wrapping Up: What Is
Love? Baby Don’t Hurt Me
case study, Tying It Together: Love Makes Your Users Awesome-
Tying It Together: Love Makes Your Users Awesome
hacks, Love Can Look Like a Hack
platforms that work, Love Just Works
S3-compatible object stores, Love Can Be Obvious-Love Can Be
Obvious
user surveys, Your Platforms Are Loved-Your Platforms Are Loved
M
maintenance windows, Architect for Transparent Migrations
mandates, Use Mandates Sparingly
market research
immediate adoption, What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?
product-market fit, Product-market fit is context-dependent
targets, Who are you targeting?
merged DevOps, Why Merged DevOps?-Why Merged DevOps?
merging teams, Merging the Teams and Adding Product Management
metadata

-- 596 of 630 --

registries integration, Integrating Metadata Registries-Integrating
Metadata Registries
usage tracking, Track Usage Metadata-Track Usage Metadata
metrics (see adoption metrics, for platform alignment)
migration, Migrations and Sunsetting of Platforms-Use Mandates
Sparingly
antipatterns, Migration Antipatterns-Migration Antipatterns
complexity management, Managing the Accidental Complexity of
Human Coordination-Managing the Accidental Complexity of
Human Coordination
coordinating smoother migrations, Coordinating Smoother
Migrations-Use Mandates Sparingly
communicating early and publicly, Communicate Early and
Publicly-Communicate Early and Publicly
pushing through, Push Through the Final 20%
scoping/limiting/prioritizing planned changes, Scope, Limit, and
Prioritize Planned Changes-Scope, Limit, and Prioritize Planned
Changes
using mandates, Use Mandates Sparingly
costs, Underestimating the Migration Cost
engineering, Engineering Easier Migrations
architecting for transparent migrations, Architect for Transparent
Migrations-Architect for Transparent Migrations

-- 597 of 630 --

developing automation to avoid clipboards, Develop Automation
to Avoid Clipboards
documenting on-ramps/off-ramps, Document On-Ramps and Off-
Ramps
tracking usage metadata, Track Usage Metadata-Track Usage
Metadata
using product abstractions that minimize glue and limit variation,
Use Product Abstractions That Minimize Glue and Limit Variation
monorepos, Product-market fit is context-dependent, Architect for
Transparent Migrations
multitenancy, Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers
O
on-call practices, On-Call Practices-Paying for on-call coverage won’t
make an unsustainable load better
getting to a sustainable on-call load, Getting to a Sustainable On-Call
Load-Paying for on-call coverage won’t make an unsustainable load
better
merged DevOps, Why Merged DevOps?-Why Merged DevOps?
24x7 on-call coverage, Why 24x7 On-Call Coverage Matters
on-ramps and off-ramps for migration, Document On-Ramps and Off-
Ramps
open-source software (OSS)
customizations for software-based abstractions, OSS Customizations

-- 598 of 630 --

operations for complexity management, Burning Out on OSS
Operations
vendor systems, Look to big bets around OSS and vendor systems
vendor wave evaluations, Look to big bets around OSS and vendor
systems-Look to big bets around OSS and vendor systems
operating platforms, Operating Platforms-Wrapping Up
essential practices versus processes, Operating Platforms
on-call practices, On-Call Practices-Paying for on-call coverage
won’t make an unsustainable load better
false alarms, Eliminate false alarms
getting to a sustainable on-call load, Getting to a Sustainable On-
Call Load-Paying for on-call coverage won’t make an
unsustainable load better
importance of 24x7 on-call coverage, Why 24x7 On-Call
Coverage Matters
merged DevOps, Why Merged DevOps?-Why Merged DevOps?
payment, Paying for on-call coverage won’t make an unsustainable
load better
prioritizing stability, Prioritize stability
secondary rotation, Use another platform team for secondary
rotation
operational feedback practices, Operational Feedback Practices-
Leadership engagement drives the right outcomes
change management, Change Management-Change Management

-- 599 of 630 --

operational reviews, Operational Reviews-Leadership engagement
drives the right outcomes
SLOs and SLAs, SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets Are
Optional
synthetic monitoring, Synthetic Monitoring-Synthetic Monitoring
support practices, Support Practices-Stage 4: At Scale with an
Engineering Support Organization
at scale with engineering support organizations, Stage 4: At Scale
with an Engineering Support Organization-Stage 4: At Scale with
an Engineering Support Organization
platform engineers and, Why Platform Engineers Should Do
Support Work
stage 1: formalizing support levels, Stage 1: Formalize Support
Levels-Stage 1: Formalize Support Levels
stage 2: hiring a support specialist, Stage 3: Hire a Support
Specialist-Stage 3: Hire a Support Specialist
stage 3: separating noncritical support from on-call support, Stage
2: Separate Noncritical Support from On-Call
operational discipline, Operational Discipline
operational feedback practices, Operational Feedback Practices-
Leadership engagement drives the right outcomes
change management, Change Management-Change Management

-- 600 of 630 --

operational reviews, Operational Reviews-Leadership engagement
drives the right outcomes
SLOs/SLAs/error budgets, SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error
Budgets Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional
synthetic monitoring, Synthetic Monitoring-Synthetic Monitoring
operational reviews
importance, Operational reviews are essential for platform teams
leadership engagement, Leadership engagement drives the right
outcomes
org-level, Org-level reviews are essential, but put practice over
process
team, Keep team reviews simple and rigorous
Orosz, Gergely, Paying for on-call coverage won’t make an
unsustainable load better
OSS (open-source software) (see open-source software)
overcoupled platforms, Tying It Together: The Case of the Overcoupled
Platform-Tying It Together: The Case of the Overcoupled Platform
oversharing of details, Beware of Oversharing Detail-Beware of
Oversharing Detail
P
PaaS (platform as a service), Change #1: Explosion of Choice
paved paths for default security, Taking a Curated Product Approach

-- 601 of 630 --

per-application glue reduction, Reducing Per-Application Glue-
Reducing Per-Application Glue
pioneer agility on robust platforms, Why It Is Hard to Build v2
Platforms, but Possible to Rearchitect-Why It Is Hard to Build v2
Platforms, but Possible to Rearchitect
planning and delivery, Planning and Delivery-Wrapping Up
bottom-up roadmap planning, Bottom-Up Roadmap Planning-
Merging roadmaps of platform teams
mandates, Mandates
planning cycle, Bringing It All Together-Merging roadmaps of
platform teams
system improvements, System Improvements-Security and
compliance improvements
“keep the lights on” work, “Keep the Lights On” Work
innersourcing, Merging roadmaps of platform teams-Merging
roadmaps of platform teams
long-running project slogs, Avoiding the Long Slog-Project team
turnover
overreach, Overreach
starting too big, Starting too big
team overturn, Project team turnover
unclear problem space, Unclear problem space
long-running projects, Planning Long-Running Projects-Project team
turnover

-- 602 of 630 --

avoiding the long slog, Avoiding the Long Slog-Project team
turnover
clarifying goals and requirements in a proposal document,
Clarifying Goals and Requirements in a Proposal Document-
Clarifying Goals and Requirements in a Proposal Document
proposal to action plan, Going from Proposal to Action Plan-
Going from Proposal to Action Plan
project management, Going from Proposal to Action Plan
status communication, Communicating Status with Biweekly Wins
and Challenges-Who should receive the updates?
basics, The Basics
challenges, Don’t Forget the Challenges!
value, Why: What’s the Value?
wins and challenges updates, What: Structuring Wins and
Challenges Updates-What: Structuring Wins and Challenges
Updates
wins and challenges writing, Getting Your Team to Write Wins and
Challenges-Who should receive the updates?
planning cycles
cadence, Cadence
list merging, Merging lists
roadmap merging, Merging roadmaps of platform teams
platform alignment, Your Platforms Are Aligned-Wrapping Up
adoption metrics, Your Platforms Are Aligned

-- 603 of 630 --

getting an organization to alignment, Tying It Together: Getting an
Organization to Alignment-Tying It Together: Getting an
Organization to Alignment
plans, Alignment of Plans-Final Alignment Comes from Principled
Leadership
confronting misalignment, Be Forthright in Confronting
Misalignment-Be Forthright in Confronting Misalignment
larger projects, Align Only on Larger Projects, Not on Every
Detail
principled leadership, Final Alignment Comes from Principled
Leadership
product strategy, Alignment of Product Strategy-Judiciously Resolve
Misalignment with Restructuring
cross-platform architecture with independent lead ICs, Foster
Cross-Platform Architecture with Independent Lead ICs
cross-platform thinking with independent product management,
Foster Cross-Platform Thinking with Independent Product
Management
customer surveys, Seek Feedback from Comments in Platform-
wide Customer Surveys
resolving misalignment with restructuring, Judiciously Resolve
Misalignment with Restructuring
purpose, Alignment to Purpose-Align Culture to Purpose by Having
Teams Collaborate

-- 604 of 630 --

platform as a service (PaaS), Change #1: Explosion of Choice
platform as product, Platform as a Product-Wrapping Up
customer engagement, Product Culture Focuses on the Customer
customer focus, Product Culture Focuses on the Customer-Escaping
the Feature Shop Trap to Serve Customers More Broadly
characteristics of internal customers, Characteristics of Internal
Customers-Characteristics of Internal Customers
collaborating with internal customers, Collaborating with Internal
Customers-Collaborating with Internal Customers
customer engagement, Characteristics of Internal Customers-
Characteristics of Internal Customers, Empathizing with
Customers
empathizing with customers, Empathizing with Customers-
Empathizing with Customers
feature shop trap, Escaping the Feature Shop Trap to Serve
Customers More Broadly-Escaping the Feature Shop Trap to Serve
Customers More Broadly
incremental delivery and proofs of concept, Partner to prototype
stakeholder management versus product management,
Collaborating with Internal Customers
product discovery and market analysis, Product Discovery and
Market Analysis-Product Metrics
evolving existing offerings, Evolving Existing Offerings:
Smoothing the Edges or Rethinking the Problem-Evolving

-- 605 of 630 --

Existing Offerings: Smoothing the Edges or Rethinking the
Problem
identifying potential platform products, Identifying Potential
Platform Products-You aren’t Google, so don’t build when you
don’t have to
market research, Market Research: Validating New Investments-
What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?
product metrics, Product Metrics-Product Metrics
product failure modes, Product Failure Modes-Having Product
Managers Doing the Work That Engineering Managers Should Be
Doing
having too many product managers, Having Too Many Product
Managers for the Size of the Engineering Team
overestimating the change budget for users, Overestimating the
Change Budget for Users
overestimating the value of new features when stability is poor,
Overestimating the Value of New Features When Stability Is Poor
product managers versus engineering managers, Having Product
Managers Doing the Work That Engineering Managers Should Be
Doing
underestimating migration costs, Underestimating the Migration
Cost
product marketing, What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?

-- 606 of 630 --

product roadmaps, Successful Product Execution: Creating a Product
Roadmap-Practice Makes Perfect
customer-facing, The Customer-Facing Roadmap
feature specification, Specification of Features
goals and metrics, Goals and Metrics: This Year
long-term vision, Vision: Long Term
middle-term strategy, Strategy: Middle Term
milestones, Milestones: Quarterly
practice, Practice Makes Perfect
platform cooperation, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-
Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
platform engineering basics, How and When to Get Started-Wrapping
Up
creating platform teams that replace cooperation, Creating the
Platform Teams That Replace Cooperation-Bonus Problems for
Integration/Shared Services Platforms
centralized ownership benefits, Are the Benefits of Centralizing
Ownership Worth the Costs?
focusing on solving problems, not new technology or architecture,
Focus on Solving Problems, Not New Technology or Architecture
problems with engineers coming from much bigger companies,
Beware of New Engineers Coming from Much Bigger Companies
realizing the collective dynamic is gone, Realize the Collective
Dynamic Is Gone

-- 607 of 630 --

special problems for integration/shared services platforms, Bonus
Problems for Integration/Shared Services Platforms-Bonus
Problems for Integration/Shared Services Platforms
timing of project manager hiring, Be Slow to Hire Product
Managers (and Avoid Project Managers)
fostering cooperation at small scale, Fostering Platform Cooperation
at Small Scale-Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
ad hoc cooperation stage, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale-Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
moving between stages, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale
“somewhat managed” stage, Fostering Platform Cooperation at
Small Scale-Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
traditional infrastructure organization transformation, Transforming a
Traditional Infrastructure Organization-Keep It Fun!
customer support, Accept That Your Team Will Spend More Time
Talking to Customers and Less Time Writing Code
engineering culture change, Your Whole Engineering Culture Has
to Change
identifying the most promising areas to start, Identify the Most
Promising Areas to Start
interview process, Update Your Interview Process
keeping the transformation fun, Keep It Fun!
necessary restructuring, Do the Necessary Restructuring

-- 608 of 630 --

product management hiring, Recognize That You Can’t Just Rub
Product Managers on It and Call It a Day
product manager surplus, Don’t Have Too Many Project Managers
product support, Change the Way You Support Your Products
recognition and rewards systems, Update Your Systems of
Recognition and Reward
platform engineering pillars, The Pillars of Platform Engineering-
Wrapping Up
application developer base, Serving a Broad Base of Application
Developers-Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers
curated product approach, Taking a Curated Product Approach-
Taking a Curated Product Approach
foundational offerings operation
operational discipline, Operational Discipline
platform responsibilities, Responsibility for the Full Platform
platform support, Supporting the Platform
generative AI, Operational Discipline-Operational Discipline
IDP requirements, Integrating Metadata Registries
operating platforms as foundations, Operating as Foundations-
Operational Discipline
software-based abstractions, Developing Software-Based
Abstractions-Integrating Metadata Registries
metadata registries integration, Integrating Metadata Registries-
Integrating Metadata Registries

-- 609 of 630 --

OSS customizations, OSS Customizations
platform service and APIs, The Major Abstractions: Platform
Service and Its APIs-The Major Abstractions: Platform Service
and Its APIs
thick clients, Thick Clients
platform rearchitecting, Rearchitecting Platforms-Wrapping Up
architecture security, Addressing Security with Architecture-
Addressing Security with Architecture
paved paths for default security, Addressing Security with
Architecture-Addressing Security with Architecture
security hazard reduction, Addressing Security with Architecture-
Addressing Security with Architecture
guardrails, Guardrails for Rearchitectures-Tranches, Slow Rollouts,
and Staying a Version Behind
comparability, Compatibility
lower environments, Lower Environments
testing, Testing
tranches, slow rollouts, and staying a version behind, Tranches,
Slow Rollouts, and Staying a Version Behind
new hires leading architecture, Planning for Rearchitectures
OSS/vendor wave evaluations, Look to big bets around OSS and
vendor systems-Look to big bets around OSS and vendor systems
pioneer agility on robust platforms, Why It Is Hard to Build v2
Platforms, but Possible to Rearchitect-Why It Is Hard to Build v2

-- 610 of 630 --

Platforms, but Possible to Rearchitect
planning, Planning for Rearchitectures -Step 4: Get Leadership Buy-
in, and Be Prepared to Wait
categories of system capability, Look to all categories of system
capability
leadership buy-in, Step 4: Get Leadership Buy-in, and Be Prepared
to Wait-Step 4: Get Leadership Buy-in, and Be Prepared to Wait
major 12-month wins, Step 3: Determine Major 12-Month Wins-
Step 3: Determine Major 12-Month Wins
migration costs, Step 2: Factor in Migration Costs
OSS and vendor systems, Look to big bets around OSS and vendor
systems
rearchitecture goals, Step 1: Think Big on Final Rearchitecture
Goals-Look to big bets around OSS and vendor systems
rearchitecting versus building a v2, Why Rearchitecting Is Preferred
to Building a v2 -Why It Is Hard to Build v2 Platforms, but Possible
to Rearchitect
architectural needs as driver of mindset demands, Architectural
Needs Drive Mindset Demands-Architectural Needs Drive
Mindset Demands
differing mindsets, Different Engineering Mindsets-Different
Engineering Mindsets
difficulties in building v2 platforms, Why It Is Hard to Build v2
Platforms, but Possible to Rearchitect

-- 611 of 630 --

platform service and APIs, The Major Abstractions: Platform Service
and Its APIs-The Major Abstractions: Platform Service and Its APIs
platform teams, Building Great Platform Teams-Wrapping Up
changes in response to organizational growth, Creating the Platform
Teams That Replace Cooperation-Bonus Problems for
Integration/Shared Services Platforms
focusing on problem solving, Focus on Solving Problems, Not
New Technology or Architecture
problems with new engineers coming from much bigger
companies, Beware of New Engineers Coming from Much Bigger
Companies
project manager issues, Be Slow to Hire Product Managers (and
Avoid Project Managers)
realizing the collective dynamic is gone, Realize the Collective
Dynamic Is Gone
special problems for integration/shared services platforms, Bonus
Problems for Integration/Shared Services Platforms-Bonus
Problems for Integration/Shared Services Platforms
culture, Creating a Platform Engineering Team Culture-Instilling a
Platform Engineering Culture
instilling, Instilling a Platform Engineering Culture
merging teams and adding product management, Merging the
Teams and Adding Product Management

-- 612 of 630 --

platform split between a development/SRE teams, A Platform Split
Between a Development and an SRE Team
strengths and weaknesses, Strengths and Weaknesses of the
Development Team
hiring, Hiring and Recognizing Engineers in All Roles-Interview for
Customer Empathy
hiring platform managers, What Makes a Great Platform Engineering
Manager?-Attention to Detail
attention to detail, Attention to Detail
interview process, If Needed, Create a New Software Engineer
Interview Process-If Needed, Create a New Software Engineer
Interview Process
interviewing for customer empathy, Interview for Customer
Empathy-Interview for Customer Empathy
interviewing for systems roles, Vary the Interview Only Slightly
for Systems Roles
long-running project experience, Experience on Big, Long-
Running Projects
new software engineer matrix, Avoid Creating a New Software
Engineer Level Matrix
one-level matrix, Have, at Most, One Level Matrix for the Systems
Roles
platform operation experience, Experience Operating Platforms
role-specific, Allow Role-Specific Titles

-- 613 of 630 --

risks of single-focus teams, The Risks of Single-Focus Platform
Teams-Why they are stuck
development focus, Too Much Development Focus
excessive systems focus, Too Much Systems Focus
roles, The Different Roles of Platform Engineers-Systems Specialists,
Other Roles on a Platform Team-Developer Advocates, Technical
Writers, and Support Engineers
developer advocates, technical writers, and support engineers,
Developer Advocates, Technical Writers, and Support Engineers
product managers, Product Managers-Product Managers
product owners, Product Owners
project managers/technical program managers, Project
Managers/Technical Program Managers
reliability engineers, Reliability Engineers
software engineers, Software Engineers-Software Engineers
systems engineers, Systems Engineers-Systems Engineers
systems specialists, Systems Specialists
platforms (generally)
defined, Defining “Platform” and Other Important Terms-Defining
“Platform” and Other Important Terms
importance of platform engineering, Why Platform Engineering Is
Becoming Essential-Wrapping Up
innovation support, Empowering Teams to Focus on Building
Platforms-Empowering Teams to Focus on Building Platforms

-- 614 of 630 --

over-general swamp, The Over-General Swamp-Result: Drowning in
the Swamp
clearing, How Platform Engineering Clears the Swamp-Allowing
Application Developers to Operate What They Develop
drowning in the swamp, Result: Drowning in the Swamp
explosion of choice, Change #1: Explosion of Choice-Change #1:
Explosion of Choice
higher operational needs, Change #2: Higher Operational Needs-
Change #2: Higher Operational Needs
limiting primitives while minimizing overhead, Limiting
Primitives While Minimizing Overhead
migration centralizing costs, Centralizing the Cost of Migrations
per-application glue reduction, Reducing Per-Application Glue-
Reducing Per-Application Glue
responsibilities, Allowing Application Developers to Operate
What They Develop
team empowerment, Empowering Teams to Focus on Building
Platforms-Empowering Teams to Focus on Building Platforms
potential platform products identification, Identifying Potential Platform
Products-You aren’t Google, so don’t build when you don’t have to
assimilation and expansion, Assimilate and expand
partner to prototype, Partner to prototype
realistic paths to adoption, Look for products with realistic paths to
adoption

-- 615 of 630 --

team size, You aren’t Google, so don’t build when you don’t have to
power-interest grid, Stakeholder Mapping: The Power-Interest Grid-
Stakeholder Mapping: The Power-Interest Grid
primitives limitation, in overhead minimization, Limiting Primitives
While Minimizing Overhead
product abstractions, Use Product Abstractions That Minimize Glue and
Limit Variation
product discovery, Managing Complexity Through Product Discovery
evolving existing offerings, Evolving Existing Offerings: Smoothing
the Edges or Rethinking the Problem-Evolving Existing Offerings:
Smoothing the Edges or Rethinking the Problem
identifying potential platform products, Identifying Potential Platform
Products-You aren’t Google, so don’t build when you don’t have to
market analysis, Product Discovery and Market Analysis-Product
Metrics
market research
immediate adoption, What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?
product-market fit, Product-market fit is context-dependent
targets, Who are you targeting?
product metrics, Product Metrics-Product Metrics
product failure modes, Product Failure Modes-Having Product Managers
Doing the Work That Engineering Managers Should Be Doing
having too many product managers, Having Too Many Product
Managers for the Size of the Engineering Team

-- 616 of 630 --

overestimating the change budget for users, Overestimating the
Change Budget for Users
overestimating the value of new features when stability is poor,
Overestimating the Value of New Features When Stability Is Poor
product managers versus engineering managers, Having Product
Managers Doing the Work That Engineering Managers Should Be
Doing
underestimating migration costs, Underestimating the Migration Cost
product management
cross-platform thinking, Foster Cross-Platform Thinking with
Independent Product Management
merging teams, Merging the Teams and Adding Product Management
stakeholder management versus, Collaborating with Internal
Customers
product managers, Product Managers-Product Managers, Foster Cross-
Platform Thinking with Independent Product Management
hiring, Recognize That You Can’t Just Rub Product Managers on It
and Call It a Day, Product Managers
roles in platform teams, Product Managers-Product Managers
surplus, Don’t Have Too Many Project Managers
product marketing, What’s the appetite for immediate adoption?
product metrics, Product Metrics-Product Metrics
collecting, Product Metrics
impact, Product Metrics

-- 617 of 630 --

importance, Product Metrics
misuse, Product Metrics
teams as source of, Product Metrics
product owners, Product Owners
product roadmaps, Successful Product Execution: Creating a Product
Roadmap-Practice Makes Perfect
customer-facing, The Customer-Facing Roadmap
feature specification, Specification of Features
goals and metrics, Goals and Metrics: This Year
long-term vision, Vision: Long Term
middle-term strategy, Strategy: Middle Term
milestones, Milestones: Quarterly
practice, Practice Makes Perfect
product scope, Challenge Assumptions About Product Scope-Challenge
Assumptions About Product Scope
product strategy, Alignment of Product Strategy-Judiciously Resolve
Misalignment with Restructuring
cross-platform architecture with independent lead ICs, Foster Cross-
Platform Architecture with Independent Lead ICs
cross-platform thinking with independent product management,
Foster Cross-Platform Thinking with Independent Product
Management
customer surveys, Seek Feedback from Comments in Platform-wide
Customer Surveys

-- 618 of 630 --

resolving misalignment with restructuring, Judiciously Resolve
Misalignment with Restructuring
product-market fit, Product-market fit is context-dependent
provisioning platforms, Responsibility for the Full Platform
Q
Quiroga, Diego, Prioritize Projects to Free Up Team Capacity
R
railways, Taking a Curated Product Approach
rearchitecting (see platform rearchitecting)
Reilly, Tanya, Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers,
Managing the Accidental Complexity of Human Coordination
relationship model of interaction, Collaborating with Internal Customers
reliability engineers, Reliability Engineers
S
S3-compatible object stores, Love Can Be Obvious-Love Can Be
Obvious
second-system effect, Why Rearchitecting Is Preferred to Building a v2
security hazard reduction, Addressing Security with Architecture-
Addressing Security with Architecture
self-service interfaces, Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers

-- 619 of 630 --

service level indicators (SLIs), SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error
Budgets Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional
service level objectives (SLOs), SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error
Budgets Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional
service-oriented architecture (SOA), The Major Abstractions: Platform
Service and Its APIs
shadow platforms
compromising, Compromising on Shadow Platforms-Compromising
on Shadow Platforms
forced resets, Shadow Platforms Force a Reset
managing complexity, Managing the Complexity of Shadow
Platforms-Managing the Complexity of Shadow Platforms
stakeholder management, Compromising on Shadow Platforms-
Compromising on Shadow Platforms
shared services platforms, Bonus Problems for Integration/Shared
Services Platforms-Bonus Problems for Integration/Shared Services
Platforms
single pane of glass concept, Your Platforms Manage Complexity-Your
Platforms Manage Complexity
SLIs (service level indicators), SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error
Budgets Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional

-- 620 of 630 --

SLOs (service level objectives), SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error
Budgets Are Optional-SLOs and SLAs Are Necessary; Error Budgets
Are Optional
slow rollouts, Tranches, Slow Rollouts, and Staying a Version Behind
small scale platform cooperation
ad hoc, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-Fostering
Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
automated continuous deployment, Fostering Platform
Cooperation at Small Scale
lightweight processes, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale
source control, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
moving between stages, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small
Scale
somewhat managed, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-
Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
correct technology, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
local development, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
stages, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-Fostering
Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
SOA (service-oriented architecture), The Major Abstractions: Platform
Service and Its APIs
software engineers, Software Engineers-Software Engineers

-- 621 of 630 --

software-based abstractions, Developing Software-Based Abstractions-
Integrating Metadata Registries
metadata registries integration, Integrating Metadata Registries-
Integrating Metadata Registries
OSS customizations, OSS Customizations
platform service and APIs, The Major Abstractions: Platform Service
and Its APIs-The Major Abstractions: Platform Service and Its APIs
“somewhat managed” stage of small scale platform cooperation,
Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-Fostering Platform
Cooperation at Small Scale
correct technology, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
local development, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
stages, Fostering Platform Cooperation at Small Scale-Fostering
Platform Cooperation at Small Scale
SRE teams, A Platform Split Between a Development and an SRE Team
stakeholder management, Managing Stakeholder Relationships-
Wrapping Up
communication transparency, Communicating with the Right
Transparency-Increase Communication During Rough Patches
increasing communication during rough patches, Increase
Communication During Rough Patches
oversharing, Beware of Oversharing Detail-Beware of Oversharing
Detail
regular 1:1 usage, Use Regular 1:1s Judiciously

-- 622 of 630 --

scaling up with interlock meetings and customer advisory boards,
Scale Up with Interlock Meetings and Customer Advisory Boards
stakeholder correctness, Beware of Oversharing Detail-Increase
Communication During Rough Patches
tracking expectations and commitments, Track Expectations and
Commitments
compromise, Finding Acceptable Compromises-Compromising on
Shadow Platforms
balancing between yes and no, Saying “No” Without Ruining the
Relationship
business impact, Be Clear About the Business Impact
saying no, Saying “No” Without Ruining the Relationship-Saying
“No” Without Ruining the Relationship
saying yes, Sometimes Say “Yes, with Compromises”-Sometimes
Say “Yes, with Compromises”
shadow platforms, Compromising on Shadow Platforms-
Compromising on Shadow Platforms
cost and budget management, Money Troubles: Cost and Budget
Management-Step 3: Come with Suggestions of What to Cut and
Strong Opinions About What to Keep
politics, Managing Stakeholder Relationships
power-interest grid, Stakeholder Mapping: The Power-Interest Grid-
Stakeholder Mapping: The Power-Interest Grid
product management versus, Collaborating with Internal Customers

-- 623 of 630 --

sunsetting, Sunsetting Platforms -Don’t Be Afraid to Sunset When It
Makes Sense
builders’ resistance to, Deciding When to Sunset
coordinating, Coordinating the Sunsetting-Coordinating the
Sunsetting
fearing, Don’t Be Afraid to Sunset When It Makes Sense
timing, Deciding When to Sunset-Deciding When to Sunset
support engineers, Developer Advocates, Technical Writers, and Support
Engineers
Synnott, Cian, Project team turnover
synthetic monitoring, Synthetic Monitoring-Synthetic Monitoring
system improvements, in bottom-up roadmap planning
efficiency and performance, Efficiency and performance
improvements-Efficiency and performance improvements
reliability and operability, Reliability and operability improvements-
Reliability and operability improvements
security and compliance, Security and compliance improvements
systems engineers, Systems Engineers-Systems Engineers
systems specialists, Systems Specialists
T
tag management systems, Integrating Metadata Registries
teams (see platform teams)

-- 624 of 630 --

technical program managers, Project Managers/Technical Program
Managers
technical writers, Developer Advocates, Technical Writers, and Support
Engineers
Terraform, Reducing Per-Application Glue
thick clients, Thick Clients
tools platforms, Responsibility for the Full Platform
tranches, Tranches, Slow Rollouts, and Staying a Version Behind
transparent migrations, Architect for Transparent Migrations-Architect
for Transparent Migrations
triangulation, Synthetic Monitoring
trusted platforms, Your Platforms Are Trusted-Wrapping Up
investments
executive sponsorship for trust of new products, Seek Executive
Sponsorship for Trust of New Products
flexibility, Gaining Trust Requires Flexibility on What Is “Right”
maintain old systems, Maintain Old Systems to Retain Trust
technical stakeholder buy-in for trust of rearchitectures, Seek
Technical Stakeholder Buy-in for Trust of Rearchitectures
operations, Trust in How You Operate-Optimize Growth in Trust by
Ordering Use Cases
empowering experienced leaders, Accelerate Trust by Empowering
Experienced Leaders

-- 625 of 630 --

optimizing growth in trust by ordering use cases, Optimize Growth
in Trust by Ordering Use Cases
overcoupled platforms, Tying It Together: The Case of the
Overcoupled Platform-Tying It Together: The Case of the
Overcoupled Platform
prioritized delivery, Trust to Prioritize Delivery-Challenge
Assumptions About Product Scope
challenging assumptions about product scope, Challenge
Assumptions About Product Scope-Challenge Assumptions About
Product Scope
creating a culture of velocity, Create a Culture of Velocity
free up team capacity, Prioritize Projects to Free Up Team
Capacity-Prioritize Projects to Free Up Team Capacity
trust in leadership versus trust in the platform, Your Platforms Are
Trusted
trusting in big investments, Trust in Your Big Investments-Gaining
Trust Requires Flexibility on What Is “Right”
24x7 on-call coverage, Why 24x7 On-Call Coverage Matters
U
user observability, Serving a Broad Base of Application Developers
W
Waiter platform, Love Can Look Like a Hack

-- 626 of 630 --

Wardley, Simon, Different Engineering Mindsets

-- 627 of 630 --

About the Authors
Camille Fournier is a technology executive with leadership experience
ranging from early-stage startups to Fortune 50 corporations. She was a
founding member of the CNCF Technical Oversight Committee and
currently serves on the board of ACM Queue. She has published two other
books with O’Reilly, The Manager’s Path: A Guide for Tech Leaders
Navigating Growth and Change and 97 Things Every Engineering Manager
Should Know.
Ian Nowland has been in the software industry for 25 years, most recently
spending 4 years at Datadog, where he was the SVP of core engineering.
Prior to this, he was at AWS in their early days (2008–2016), where he was
the lead engineer on the launch of Amazon EMR and the leader of the first
five years of the EC2 Nitro project. He is currently a cofounder at a stealth
mode startup.

-- 628 of 630 --

Colophon
The animal on the cover of Platform Engineering is a marbled newt
(Triturus marmoratus), a striking amphibian native to Western Europe,
specifically France and the Iberian peninsula. Its name is derived from its
distinctive appearance: its dark brown or black body is adorned with
irregular, marbled patterns of green. This coloration provides excellent
camouflage in the newt’s natural habitat of woodlands and meadows.
Female marbled newts also have an orange stripe running along their back.
While females are larger, these newts range from about 5 to 6.5 inches long.
The marbled newt’s diet consists mainly of insects, worms, and other small
invertebrates, which it hunts both on land and in water. Though this animal
is primarily terrestrial, as an amphibian it requires access to water for
breeding and tends to remain in ponds during colder times of year. During
breeding season each February, males develop a striking, feathery crest on
their back and attract mates by spreading pheromones through a tail-lashing
motion. Female newts deposit eggs individually, first smelling and
inspecting the leaves of aquatic plants before selecting a leaf to wrap
around the egg. Scientists have determined that marbled newts rely on
celestial clues such as geomagnetic fields and constellations to locate
familiar breeding ponds.

-- 629 of 630 --

The marbled newt is listed as vulnerable by the IUCN due to habitat loss.
Many of the animals on O’Reilly covers are endangered; all of them are
important to the world.
The cover illustration is by Jose Marzan, based on a black-and-white
engraving from Lydekker’s Natural History. The series design is by Edie
Freedman, Ellie Volckhausen, and Karen Montgomery. The cover fonts are
Gilroy Semibold and Guardian Sans. The text font is Adobe Minion Pro and
the heading font is Adobe Myriad Condensed.

-- 630 of 630 --

