

-- 1 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 2 of 353 --



-- 3 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 4 of 353 --

25 NW 23rd Pl, Suite 6314
Portland, OR 97210
Copyright © 2024 by Steve Pereira and Andrew Davis
All rights reserved. For information about permission to reproduce selections from this
book, write to Permissions, IT Revolution Press, LLC, 25 NW 23rd Pl, Suite 6314,
Portland, OR 97210.
First Edition
Printed in the United States of America
30 29 28 27 26 25 24 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Cover, book design, and illustrations by
Julianna Johnson and Kate Giambrone, Bologna Sandwich LLC.
Cover layout by Devon Smith.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2024931067
ISBN: 9781950508457
eBook ISBN: 9781950508464
Web PDF ISBN: 9781950508488
Audiobook ISBN: 9781950508471
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases or for information on
booking authors for an event, please visit our website at www.ITRevolution.com.
FLOW ENGINEERING
OceanofPDF.com

-- 5 of 353 --

Dedication
This book is dedicated to everyone brave enough and
idealistic enough to bring humanity and flow back to
the workplace.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 6 of 353 --

Contents
List of Figures
Foreword by Karen Martin
Introduction
PART 1 The Flow Landscape
1 The Problem with Scale
2 Solutions to Scale
3 The Elements of Action
4 Flow Engineering
PART 2 Mapping the Landscape
5 Outcome Mapping
6 Current State Value Stream Mapping
7 Dependency Mapping
8 Future State Value Stream Mapping
9 The Flow Roadmap
PART 3 Navigating the Landscape
10 Principles of Flow Engineering
11 Leading Flow Engineering
12 Traps to Avoid
13 Value Stream Management
14 Scaling Flow Engineering

-- 7 of 353 --

Conclusion
Appendix
Glossary
Bibliography
Notes
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
OceanofPDF.com

-- 8 of 353 --

List of Figures
Introduction
FIG. 0.1 Bolt Global Current State Challenge
Chapter 1
FIG. 1.1 The Three Human Costs of Scale
FIG. 1.2 Misalignment in Teams
FIG. 1.3 The Paradox of Scale Illustrated
FIG. 1.4 The Checkbox Project: Teams Involved
Chapter 2
FIG. 2.1 The Spectrum of Solution Approaches
FIG. 2.2 The Three Gaps to Enabling Large-Scale Collaboration
FIG. 2.3 The Iron Triangle of Constraints
FIG. 2.4 Cybernetic Feedback Loop
FIG. 2.5 A Siloed Organizational Structure
FIG. 2.6 Effects of Limited Visibility
FIG. 2.7 The Value Stream
FIG. 2.8 A Simple Value Stream Map
FIG. 2.9 The Toyota Production System’s Improvement Kata
TBL. 2.1 Cybernetic Control Systems in Popular Decision Frameworks
Chapter 3
FIG. 3.1 Collective and Individual Flow

-- 9 of 353 --

FIG. 3.2 Effects of the Three Elements of Action
FIG. 3.3 The Three Elements of Action
FIG. 3.4 Cybernetic Loop with the Elements of Action
FIG. 3.5 The Elements of Action: Value, Clarity, and Flow
Chapter 4
FIG. 4.1 The Power of a Map
FIG. 4.2 Value, Clarity, and Flow Woven through all Flow Engineering
Maps
FIG. 4.3 Five Maps of Flow Engineering
TBL. 4.1 Addressing the Three Gaps through Flow Engineering
TBL. 4.2 Each Map Serves at Least One of the Elements of Action
TBL. 4.3 General Facilitator Rules of Engagement
FIG. 4.4 A Segment of the Full Value Stream Map
TBL. 4.4 Purposes and Benefits of the Five Flow Engineering Exercises
Chapter 5
FIG. 5.1 Outcome Mapping Primarily Serves to Identify Value
FIG. 5.2 The Five Stages of Outcome Mapping
FIG. 5.3 A Rapid Outcome Map
TBL. 5.1 Common Situations That Can Be Transformed into Actionable
Outcomes via Outcome Discovery
FIG. 5.4 Five Categories for Outcome Mapping
FIG. 5.5 Stages of Outcome Mapping
FIG. 5.6 Example of the Discovery Stage of Outcome Mapping
FIG. 5.7 Notes Organized into Themes
FIG. 5.8 Example of Voting Using Dots
FIG. 5.9 A Completed Outcome Map

-- 10 of 353 --

FIG. 5.10 The Challenge Landscape within Sharon’s Area of
Responsibility
FIG. 5.11 The Bolt Global Outcome Mapping Process
Chapter 6
FIG. 6.1 Value Stream Mapping Primarily Serves to Build Clarity
FIG. 6.2 The Five Stages of Value Stream Mapping
FIG. 6.3 Simplified Value Stream Map
TBL. 6.1 Differences between Customer Journey Maps and Value Stream
Maps
FIG. 6.4 Customer Journey vs. Value Stream
FIG. 6.5 The Traditional Form of Representing a Value Stream Map for
Manufacturing
FIG. 6.6 A Simple Flow Engineering Value Stream Map
FIG. 6.7 Example of a Completed Value Stream Map
FIG. 6.8 Identifying a Constraint in the Value Stream
FIG. 6.9 Example Value Stream Map for Software Development
FIG. 6.10 Sample Value Stream Map Showing Cycle Timing and Wait
Timing
FIG. 6.11 Annotated Value Stream Map
FIG. 6.12 Example Small-Scale Value Stream Map
FIG. 6.13 Identifying a Constraint on a Value Stream Map
FIG. 6.14 Value Stream Map with VAT and %C&A
FIG. 6.15 Sample Value Stream Map with Many Notes
Chapter 7
FIG. 7.1 Dependency Mapping Primarily Serves to Enhance the Clarity
Built by Value Stream Mapping

-- 11 of 353 --

FIG. 7.2 Dependency Mapping Targets Only Dependencies That Impact
the Constraint
FIG. 7.3 Example of the Extent of Dependencies
FIG. 7.4 The Five Stages of Dependency Mapping
FIG. 7.5 Dependency Map of the Constraint: Environment Setup
FIG. 7.6 Gap between Sharon’s Team and Karl’s Team
FIG. 7.7 Three Assets for Collaboration
FIG. 7.8 The Dependency Map Jointly Created by Karl and Sharon
FIG. 7.9 Suspected Constraint Identified in Value Stream Mapping
FIG. 7.10 Example Sub–Value Stream Map
FIG. 7.11 A Sub–Value Stream Map to Illustrate the Dependent
Workflow
FIG. 7.12 Direct Causes of Hot Spots
FIG. 7.13 Practice the Five Whys to Dig Deeper into the Suspected
Constraint
FIG. 7.14 A Visualization of Dependencies across the Flow of the
Checkbox Project
Chapter 8
FIG. 8.1 Future State Mapping Opens the Door to Enabling Flow
FIG. 8.2 Current, Ideal, and Future State Maps
FIG. 8.3 Flow Engineering Cycle of Mapping as an Improvement Kata
FIG. 8.4 The Four Stages of Future State Mapping
FIG. 8.5 Current State Map with Bottleneck Highlighted
FIG. 8.6 Future State Map with Improvement Areas Noted in Green
FIG. 8.7 Future State Map Reduced to Seven Serial Steps and One
Parallel Step
FIG. 8.8 Future State Map with Cycle Timings
TBL. 8.1 Results of Mapping at a Travel Tech Company

-- 12 of 353 --

Chapter 9
FIG. 9.1 The Flow Roadmap Primarily Serves to Enable Flow
FIG. 9.2 The Three Stages of a Flow Roadmap
TBL. 9.1 Issues Transformed into Actions/Experiments to Improve Flow
at Bolt Global
FIG. 9.3 Sharon’s Completed Flow Roadmap
FIG. 9.4 The Flow Roadmap Board
FIG. 9.5 The Future State Map Showing Improvement Areas
FIG. 9.6 Improvement Opportunities Broken Down into Actions
FIG. 9.7 Possible Improvements Ranked by Importance
FIG. 9.8 Plot Feasibility along the Horizontal Axis
FIG. 9.9 Indicate Dependencies between Activities
FIG. 9.10 Improvement Activities Categorized by Time Horizon (Now,
Next, Later)
FIG. 9.11 Items Arranged in Sequential Order: Now, Next, Later
FIG. 9.12 Identified Measure of Progress
TBL. 9.2 Gartner’s Flow Metrics Cover Technical, Product, and Business
Concerns
FIG. 9.13 Example of Adding Assigned Owners
FIG. 9.14 Flow Roadmap Creation Progressing from Problem Areas and
Concerns to Actions
Chapter 10
FIG. 10.1 The Five Principles of Lean
FIG. 10.2 A Simple Outcome Map Representing Diverse Concerns
FIG. 10.3 A Simple Flow Engineering Value Stream Map
FIG. 10.4 Value Stream Map Highlighting Wait Times
FIG. 10.5 The Efficiency Matrix

-- 13 of 353 --

FIG. 10.6 Theory of Constraints Step 1: Identify the Constraint
FIG. 10.7 Theory of Constraints Step 2: Exploit the Constraint
FIG. 10.8 Theory of Constraints Step 3: Subordinate Everything Else to
the Constraint
FIG. 10.9 Theory of Constraints Step 4: Elevate the Constraint
FIG. 10.10 Excess Work in Progress Is a Sign of Lacking Pull Systems
Chapter 11
FIG. 11.1 A Value Stream Map Depicts Multiple Feedback Loops
FIG. 11.2 Business Frameworks Are Templates for Management
FIG. 11.3 The Constraint on a Value Stream
TBL. 11.1 Examples of Enabling and Governing Constraints
Chapter 12
FIG. 12.1 Outcome Discovery and Outcome Mapping Help You Craft a
Productive Narrative
FIG. 12.2 Outcome Mapping and Discovery Can Bridge Local Incentives
by Establishing a Higher-Value Shared Target
FIG. 12.3 Limited Visibility Enables Limited Focus
FIG. 12.4 Example Value Stream Map with Irrelevant Downstream
Precision
FIG. 12.5 The Current State Map Depicting the Full Agile Release Train
(ART)
TBL. 12.1 Visual Activity Classification Legend, Depicting Non–Value-
Adding, Testing, Value-Adding, and Coordinating Activities
FIG. 12.6 Example Future State Map Depicting Non-Critical and Non-
Value-Adding Activities
TBL. 12.2 Current State Flow Performance vs. Future State

-- 14 of 353 --

Chapter 13
FIG. 13.1 Focus on Project Leads to Ignoring Longer Term Impact
FIG. 13.2 Each Cycle of Continuous Improvement Builds on the Previous
One
FIG. 13.3 Current State Map: Steps, Timing, Roles, Tools, Artifacts
FIG. 13.4 Project or Product Orientation Lies on a Spectrum
TBL. 13.1 A Comparison of Value Stream Mapping and Value Stream
Management
FIG. 13.5 Phil’s Journey at Parchment
TBL. 13.2 The Parchment Measurement Journey
FIG. 13.6 Waiting for Data Availability and Quality Means Uncertainty
Remains High for Longer and Outcomes Are Later to Arrive
Chapter 14
FIG. 14.1 Value Streams Sharing a Common Constraint
FIG. 14.2 The Spectrum of Flow Investment
TBL. 14.1 Developmental and Operational Focus Implications
FIG. 14.3 Interdependence of Core and Supportive Value Streams
FIG. 14.4 A Value Stream Network Map
FIG. 14.5 The Y Axis of a Value Stream Network Map
FIG. 14.6 The X Axis of the Value Stream Network Map
FIG. 14.7 Connections Show Dependencies between Value Streams
FIG. 14.8 Example Value Stream Network Map Showing Shift in Internal
Dev Platform
FIG. 14.9 Example Value Stream Network Map Showing Developmental
Shift
FIG. 14.10 Flow Enabling Team Interactions with Product Streams
FIG. 14.11 The Flywheel of Flow Engineering

-- 15 of 353 --

Appendix
FIG. A.1 Value, Clarity, and Flow
FIG. A.2 Calculating Speed: Lead, Wait, and Active Times
FIG. A.3 Cycle Time Includes All Value-Added and Non–Value-Added
Time Composing Each Stage
FIG. A.4 Calculating Quality: Percent Complete & Accurate
FIG. A.5 Example Map Board in Progress
TBL. A.1 Estimated Costs of Flow Engineering Exercises
OceanofPDF.com

-- 16 of 353 --

Foreword
THE JOURNEY TOWARD ORGANIZATIONAL excellence demands commitment
to value, clarity, and flow. This requires establishing a clear target,
aligning stakeholders, and optimizing workflow. In my four decades of
experience with value stream mapping, I’ve seen countless examples of
the impact this practice can have in empowering organizational change.
I wrote
Value Stream Mapping in 2013, and the practice continues to
grow in popularity every year. Despite its recognized value, a gap exists
between value stream mapping as an aspiration and real-world
implementation. This book targets that gap, offering practical guidance
for any organization.
I first met Steve through LinkedIn in 2020, and I met Andrew shortly
after. We immediately recognized a shared passion for thinking of
collaborative work in terms of value, clarity, and flow. We shared stories
about incredible results achieved through value stream mapping in all
sizes and types of organizations. We found that we shared a commitment
to sharing those stories and what we’ve learned by using value streams as
a model for work.
I was introduced to value stream mapping as a diagnostic, design, and
prioritization tool for improving work systems. As I started working with
clients to begin to “see” their work systems in a fact-based, data-driven
way, I realized that value stream mapping was more than a “tool.” It’s an
essential management practice with benefits far beyond creating flow
across interconnected functions and work teams. It also addresses these
common organizational problems:

-- 17 of 353 --

• Siloed decision-making and work design that slows an
organization’s ability to deliver value to its customers, become agile
and responsive, and create high-performing environments.
• Friction between leaders and entire branches of an organization
due to misaligned strategic goals and priorities for improving how
the organization operates.
• And not understanding how work flows—or, more commonly,
doesn’t flow—across the organization.
In an increasingly complex and interconnected business landscape,
organizations of all sizes face myriad challenges as they strive to scale
without losing their way in the process. The complexities of modern
enterprises often lead to misalignment, inefficiencies, and a lack of
clarity, hindering the organization’s ability to effectively and efficiently
deliver value to its customers. As we navigate these challenges, it
becomes increasingly evident that a holistic approach to understanding
and optimizing organizational workflow is essential but often missing.
The power of value stream mapping lies in its ability to provide a
balance of both visual and data representations, constructing a useful
representation that corresponds to a complete business workflow and
layering on information about performance and effectiveness. This
shared visual representation of the work process serves as a focal point
for team discussions around performance improvement. Rapid
implementations of value stream mapping serve as a quick and easy on-
ramp for more detailed and comprehensive maps as buy-in increases.
Davis and Pereira say: “Map quickly, show promise, go further.” The goal
is to create a visual, supported by data, that quickly reveals specific
improvement opportunities.
Value stream mapping is not only a visualization exercise but also a
method of communicating visually. It allows teams to collectively
establish a shared mental model of the goal of their work and the

-- 18 of 353 --

method for carrying it out. This seemingly simple exercise provides
individuals with the mental context needed to work effectively as a team.
The apparent simplicity of a value stream map abstracts a complex
collection of perspectives and data, yet this simplicity enables clear
representation, conversation, and focus. Simple isn’t easy, but this book
provides step-by-step guidance to navigate the complexity of building
these simple maps. Andrew and Steve have presented
Flow Engineering
as a clear set of practices that help to distill the complex reality of
collaborative work into maps that make the invisible visible and reveal
hidden insights on the most impactful improvements. This not only
enables effective action but also teaches essential Lean and Agile
principles by putting them into practice.
Flow Engineering offers approachable, flexible, and scalable practices
to address the challenges of scale, visibility, and misalignment in modern
organizations. By providing a simple, digital-native starting point on-
ramp to effective action through value stream mapping, it meets teams
where they are today: distributed, distracted, disoriented, and
disconnected. With it, teams can gain a comprehensive understanding of
their workflow, identify improvement opportunities, and align their
efforts with the value they can deliver. The book serves as a guide to
align stakeholders, identify opportunities, and implement performance
improvement in complex organizations. The insights and practices
shared within these pages will empower leaders to enable focus, clarity,
and collaboration as catalysts for meaningful and sustainable action.
—Karen Martin, 2024
Author of
The Outstanding Organization
and
Value Stream Mapping
OceanofPDF.com

-- 19 of 353 --

Introduction
WE’VE BECOME VICTIMS OF SUCCESS. Organizations are now so large and
interconnected that digital dependencies tie us in knots. Across the
organization, our understanding is fractured. We work in a hurricane of
distraction, drowning in a sea of data, and we struggle to leverage it to
make improvement decisions. We have hyper-optimized much of our
work, and yet it can take months to make small business improvements.
Organizations are tantalized by the promise of radical transformations
(cultural, digital, Lean, Agile, DevOps), but these often devolve into
rebranding and renaming the status quo rather than bringing about real
change.
All of these challenges are amplified by the issue of scale. The scale of
our organizations has grown dramatically as it has become easier to
expand globally, to acquire new businesses, and to address new markets.
While performance can be optimized in small autonomous teams, no
team is an island. Enabling success at scale necessitates some kind of
coupling across teams. These threads, which connect everyone and
everything to everyone and everything else in the organization,
inevitably get tangled in knots.
Effective action in organizations of any size depends on having
coherent goals. But having coherent goals depends on having shared
clarity. A lack of shared clarity sabotages improvement efforts. And scale
makes achieving and maintaining shared clarity nearly impossible. Even
at the scale of a “two-pizza team,” clarity is often sacrificed at the altar of

-- 20 of 353 --

getting things done. And with the demise of clarity, our ability to get
things done withers.
The default approach to addressing the problem of scale is to
increase coordination. But the cost of attempting large-scale
choreography across an organization is immense. Assembling all the
stakeholders to work out their separate goals, incentives, perspectives,
mandates, processes, dependencies, and challenges is neither efficient
nor effective. Even with extensive collaboration efforts, the path to
productivity isn’t clear.
We’ve spoken to organizations that have spent $28 million and twelve
months to add a single option to their billing system. We’ve seen
organizations invest in automation that won’t improve their time to
market by a single percent. We’ve seen organizations with high-
performing, multimillion-dollar “innovation centers” but no way to bring
their improvements to market.
As scale increases, waste and delay grow exponentially, and
interdependence exacts a massive tax on the business. Before we can
descale, simplify, and disentangle our organizations, we need to make
effective decisions about where to invest in improvements today within
the context of our current state.
We need to be able to chip away at complexity. We need the
capability to clearly set a target outcome, assess the current state
landscape, and navigate decisions to address constraints and obstacles.
We need to dismantle and decouple crippling dependencies and enable
effective descaling to improve flow. And because collaboration is critical
to this effort, we need effective ways to share perspectives, information,
efforts, and ideas to disentangle the complexity.
All of this depends on a shared understanding of value, shared clarity,
and a unified flow of activity in the right direction. And yet value, clarity,
and flow are elusive within every business at scale. If you’re looking to
improve performance in a large-scale, complicated environment, this

-- 21 of 353 --

book is for you. It’s a practical collection of exercises to help you improve
flow across your organization quickly, visually, and collaboratively.
The Struggle for Value, Clarity, and Flow
The raw confusion that we have repeatedly seen in organizations and
teams can feel like criminal waste. Enabling people to work toward a
meaningful purpose demands a substantial amount of clarity. Teams
need to see not only how their efforts contribute to valuable outcomes
but also
how the broader organization’s activities are serving legitimate
customer needs.
What orients a group of people into being a team is a sense of
purpose that is shared rather than fragmented. Once the purpose is clear,
the team can proceed to improve their understanding of how to reach
shared goals.
Much has been said about having a shared sense of purpose and its
power to inspire, engage, and direct. This sense of purpose can be
outward looking or inward looking. The team can be focused on
bringing benefit to others (benevolence and value delivery) or to the
team itself (survival and value extraction). Maturation, whether as an
individual, a team, or an organization, can be summarized as shifting our
energy from survival to benevolence.
Org charts are, by nature, inward looking. In fact, the customer is
nowhere on the org chart. Customer orientation requires a
fundamentally different way of thinking about purpose within the
organization. To enable an effective and sustainable flow of work, a
team’s shared purpose needs to be oriented around the customer.
The inward looking nature of the org chart makes it very difficult for
teams to become clear on the purpose their work serves for customers
and where they fit in the big picture of the organization. If you ask any
two people on a team what the most important customer need is, it’s a

-- 22 of 353 --

good bet they’ll have surprisingly different answers. The larger the
distance between efforts and outcomes, the harder it is to effectively
connect what you’re doing to what matters most. In the absence of a
simple purpose oriented around the customer, teams default to acting in
incoherent and self-serving ways.
Interestingly, the org chart is one of the only pieces of information in
an organization that is kept meticulously up to date. The org chart is the
simplest view of the internal power structures that underpin the
organization. It is an explicit representation of power hierarchies, and
the only obvious goal from looking at the org chart is to try to ascend it.
The power structures embodied in the org chart lead to another
significant challenge. Because of organizational power structures and
hierarchies, people are often nervous about expressing their real
understanding and ideas. Contributors can be unsure about the value of
their input and the consequences of sharing it with the group. Under
these circumstances, sharing ideas constitutes a risk, especially when
those ideas come from people who don’t already have organizational
power. The only safe ideas are those that are already widely shared.
If we optimize for only sharing what’s safe, then new and potentially
valuable ideas will never have an opportunity to take hold. This is why a
culture of psychological safety is necessary for high information flow.
Few organizations have created the visibility, psychological safety, and
effective feedback loops required to support truly open information
sharing. In the absence of these conditions, you’re operating in an
ineffective organization.
Attaining clarity depends on understanding the dynamics of group
collaboration. In a team of eight people, you will have eight different sets
of priorities, eight unique perspectives, and eight distinct behaviors.
Being able to operate as a “team” is not something that’s easy or
automatic; it requires enormous trust and openness, as well as
significant effort to keep the group’s priorities, understanding, and

-- 23 of 353 --

activities in sync. That investment, however, is powerful since it imbues
the group with a collective intelligence that enables effective collective
action. As Ken Blanchard has said, “No one of us is as smart as all of us.”1
The fastest path to clarity is visibility. Thirty percent of the human
brain is dedicated exclusively to visual processing.2 Making a group’s
most important priorities and understandings visible creates a common
shared resource and keeps people’s attention on that information by
making it central to meetings and workspaces.
By contrast, the default in most organizations is meandering
conversations and an endless sprawl of digital documents, spreadsheets,
and slide decks. Any one document taken in isolation is easy to
misunderstand, as they typically embody a single perspective and lack
critical context. This fragmentation of information leads to a
fragmentation of thinking and action.
Gaining shared clarity depends on creating a simple, visible, and
shared representation of a team’s purpose and activity. This view must be
oriented around bringing benefit to customers, and teams must be able
to pool their collective understanding honestly, openly, and without fear.
Otherwise, it’s impossible for teams to establish the key element of
organizational success: the development of collective intelligence
effectively applied to customer outcomes. Without that, you’re not
getting flow; you’re not getting feedback; you’re not getting smarter;
you’re just not getting it.
Unblocking the Stream and Finding Flow
Many contributors and leaders alike find themselves in large, “successful”
organizations that still struggle to operate (and, more importantly,
cooperate) at a high level of performance. These organizations may work
with cutting-edge technology, aiming to optimize digital processes down
to milliseconds, while at the same time taking months to deliver results.

-- 24 of 353 --

The paradox of modern organizations is that the more specialized
workers become, the more they struggle to understand the broader
system in which they fit. Even the most capable contributors in these
organizations— including coaches, team leads, and technical experts—
are constrained by the limits of the system in which they work.
Silos are a natural consequence of specialization and scale. They
exemplify the difficulty of maintaining clarity across large groups. As
silos form, individuals and teams alike fall back to local operation and
optimization rather than the big picture of sustained customer value
delivery. The more complex the organization, the harder it is to see how
localized activity contributes to the overall flow of work and the ultimate
delivery of business value. This undermines motivation and makes an
effective improvement strategy seem out of reach.
Many people study and admire high-performing organizations like
Toyota and Amazon but struggle to understand how to catalyze
performance across their own organizations. To catalyze and foster that
performance, you need a system to enable effective action. You need to
focus and align your efforts to a valuable target state, develop shared
clarity on the current state, and establish a flow of activities toward
delivering that outcome.
Collaborative mapping develops clarity throughout that process and
aligns those involved while enabling understanding for anyone who’s
part of an improvement effort. Mapping equips changemakers with
simple and safe tools to establish and expand pockets of clarity
throughout the organization.
As more and more people in an organization build these skills, the
organization becomes increasingly capable of high-performance
collaboration. Profound change, such as building a Lean, Agile, or
learning organization, depends on incremental change at the team and
cross-team level. Mapping is a critical ingredient in building the enabling

-- 25 of 353 --

structure, architecture, and expertise of a high-performing technical
organization.
Flow Engineering is a series of collaborative mapping exercises
designed to connect the dots between an unclear current state and a
clear path to a target state. It’s an open, adaptive, and engaging series of
practices that can take you from complexity to clarity, from friction to
flow. The practical goal of this book is to provide you with scaffolding
that allows you to confidently map for greater value, clarity, and flow
without worrying about how to start or going off the rails.
Flow Engineering has been successfully applied across finance, health
care, telecom, government, defense, retail, and education. It’s been used
to improve every type of workflow you’d find in an organization, from
customer onboarding, product development, and hiring to sales, service
engagements, and beyond. Some of the results of applying Flow
Engineering include:
• $20 million of investment saved by targeting the correct constraint;
• eighteen months of development time saved by targeting key
constraints;
• feature development reduced from sixteen weeks to two weeks;
• partner engagement reduced from a twelve-month process to
three months;
• client engagement reduced from six weeks to two weeks;
• customer onboarding reduced from one week to one hour;
• customer onboarding (data/integration) reduced from six weeks to
four days; and
• addressing a common dependency to unblock five teams with one
intervention.
In most cases, these benefits came from just a few hours of mapping.
Mapping reveals hidden opportunities that teams can address quickly by

-- 26 of 353 --

eliminating waste, aligning efforts, and adjusting their ways of working.
The result is not only improved collective flow but also improved
individual flow for everyone involved. (We’ll discuss collective and
individual flow in more detail later in the book.)
CASE STUDY
Boeing Employees Credit Union (BECU)
At the 2023 Flowtopia conference, Taryn Spingler and Doug Mathieu presented their
progress after a year of engineering flow across Boeing Employees Credit Union (BECU).
BECU started in 1935 to fund loans to support new hires during the Great Depression. Now,
it has nearly 1.4 million members, 2,500 employees, and over $28 billion in assets.
In their presentation, they described the previous eighteen months, which brought three
org changes, operating model changes, and a renewed focus on value and outcomes. Their
story relays a transition from “mayhem” to “wins” enabled by their efforts with Flow
Engineering.
Mayhem
• Lack of Clear Priorities: Value-based priorities were not clear across all levels.
• Lack of Leadership Alignment: Some leaders were adamant that money talks and
outcomes without clear financial impact were not a priority.
• Lack of Alignment across the Value Stream: Misalignment led to frustration,
factions, and pushback (optimization of the whole may seem suboptimal for the parts).
• Outcomes vs. Tools: “Roadmap organized around business outcomes? I already have
a roadmap based on cool technology.”
• Inspect and Adapt? Nope, lacking governance and time drove busywork rather than
work on the highest-value items.
• Outdated Project Management: Their old project management approach made
improvement efforts too complex, creating a waterfall flow and not allowing for
iteration and delivery of value.
• Not Enough Time: Teams were too busy for traditional value stream mapping.
Wins

-- 27 of 353 --

Flow Engineering allowed BECU to reveal and extract insights from the previously hidden
work across the value stream.
The practice of Flow Engineering (Outcome Mapping, Value Stream Mapping,
Dependency Mapping, Future State Mapping, and Flow Roadmapping) helped baseline a
process to extract insights:
• Outcome Mapping was used to create alignment and shift focus away from
implementation to the goal they were trying to accomplish.
• Dependency Mapping highlighted processes characterized by minimal value-added
time.
• Now, Next, Later Flow Roadmaps helped drive strategy and prioritization.
• Value Stream Mapping empowered them to quickly (within one to four hours) establish
clarity on flow and issues, and it made clear which leaders should volunteer to own
each value stream and performance improvement.
Flow Engineering enabled alignment, visibility into dependencies, and a sense of
ownership. Improvement projects were reframed in the context of the value stream,
reducing their apparent complexity. This clarity and visibility created a demand for further
Value Stream Mapping within the organization.
Experimenting with Flow Engineering led to a repeatable practice and a new way of
working. Flow Engineering maps provided a templated approach to scale and sustain the
practices as part of their business reference architecture and their standard implementation
approach. As a result, their architecture organization now incorporates Value Stream
Mapping into early governance activities, aligning all of their efforts for performance
improvement to business outcomes and enabling flow as a core capability. Taryn and Doug
courageously pioneered these activities based on early articles and presentations on Flow
Engineering.
Who This Book Is For
We’ve written this book for our peers working in technology in large
enterprises. However, we’ve applied and seen the techniques described in
this book in contexts far beyond our immediate frame of reference. It’s
easy to adapt and tailor to varied situations. It’s flexible enough to help
teams of any skill level, and it’s robust enough to be used for ambitious
process improvements or day-to-day problem-solving.

-- 28 of 353 --

We’re specialists in digital product development and delivery, but
we’ve seen the need for value, clarity, and flow throughout many roles,
industry verticals, levels of seniority, and stages of growth and scale.
This book is written for professionals familiar with the basics of Lean
and Agile but unclear how to start, restart, teach, or make measurable
progress with confidence. This is a book for curious problem-solvers
struggling to help their teams or organizations see the big picture. This is
for those grappling with complicated frameworks and operating models
and wondering, “How?”
We’re aiming to help mid-level leadership in complicated enterprises,
but we’ve applied and seen this material used in a broad range of roles
and contexts, like product management, Agile coaching, technical
leadership, architecture, marketing, sales, project management, design,
customer success, and more. Why does it work in all these cases? It’s a
simple, flexible practice of building a path from where you are to where
you want to go. Once you’ve grasped the concepts and techniques, you
could find yourself applying Flow Engineering in contexts we’ve never
imagined.
If you’re looking for a clear, approachable, step-by-step system for
building value, clarity, and flow across your organization, this book is
written for you.
How This Book Is Organized
We’ll begin this book by looking at the gaps that need to be bridged and
why they have been so hard to cross in most organizations. We will
ground the ideas in research, personal experience, and case studies.
Specifically, we’ll give additional background on the problem of scale and
how it affects our ability to see, understand, and address performance
issues.

-- 29 of 353 --

We’ll also introduce the hidden elements of effective action: value,
clarity, and flow. Then we’ll lay the foundation for Flow Engineering:
how to work backward from a shared context and target, and how to
connect dots from needs and goals to actionable insights.
Once the framework is set, we’ll guide you through the practices of
Flow Engineering—a series of quick, collaborative mapping exercises,
each meant to bring you progressively closer to value, clarity, and flow.
The process starts with Outcome Mapping to clarify a valuable target
and potential obstacles for a team. We then use Value Stream Mapping to
clarify the current workflow and possible improvements. To address the
opportunities revealed in the value stream, we conduct Dependency
Mapping and envision improvement opportunities to construct a Future
State Value Stream Map. The understanding generated from these
sessions is then synthesized into a Flow Roadmap that transforms
insights into prioritized, measurable, and assigned actions.
Finally, we’ll describe approaches to scale and sustain your progress
with Flow Engineering beyond an initial pilot. We’ll share how to launch
your own Flow Engineering enabling team to expand impact and
learning across your organization. Beyond mapping, we’ll share how to
implement large-scale, continuous, and automated Flow Engineering
with Value Stream Management. We’ll also share how Flow Engineering
can help you navigate key inflection points, like acquisitions and reorgs,
as you evolve.
Throughout the book, we’ll use the fictional illustration of Bolt
Global (see below) to help illustrate the practices of Flow Engineering.
BOLT GLOBAL
Introduction
Sharon is VP of Engineering at a Global 2000 company that’s struggled with digital
transformation attempts over the past ten years. Sharon’s case and organization, while

-- 30 of 353 --

fictional, represent an amalgamation of what we’ve seen broadly across large organizations
in various industries.
Sharon’s company, which we’ll call Bolt Global, is facing a lot of market pressure.
Competitive pressure is pushing them to make operational efficiency improvements and to
open new lines of business. They’ve launched several improvement initiatives, which have
created a lot of work. Sharon’s team now has a massive backlog of changes they’re tasked
with delivering. She’s under pressure to figure out how to deliver twice as fast as she’s able
to do today. The clear question is how. (See Figure 0.1.)
FIGURE 0.1: Bolt Global Current State Challenge
Every organization grapples with how to address current state challenges in the
face of increasing scale.
Although it’s a fictional scenario, Sharon’s situation is similar to lots of organizations
around the world. Many of these massive IT initiatives and digital transformation projects
end in failure. If we look at the literature about why many of these initiatives struggle to get
off the ground or struggle to succeed, many sources3 point to an underlying lack of clarity.4
Either leadership fails to gain the clarity they need; or they fail to share that clarity across the
organization, meaning individual contributors don’t gain clarity; or the organization fails to
collectively process concerns or dissenting opinions that could reveal flaws in the plan; or
they fail to sustain clarity as the competitive landscape changes and technology evolves.
Throughout the book, we’ll use Bolt Global’s fictional situation as an aggregate of
organizations we’ve worked with over the years to illustrate how the practices of Flow
Engineering have helped alleviate these challenges.

-- 31 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 32 of 353 --

PART 1
The Flow Landscape
OceanofPDF.com

-- 33 of 353 --

CHAPTER 1
The Problem with Scale
“… companies at all scales are classic complex adaptive
systems.”
GEOFFREY WEST, from
Scale: The Universal Laws of Life, Growth, and Death in
Organisms, Cities, and Companies
SCALE UNDERMINES THE FOUNDATIONS of effective action. This is not news
to anyone who works in a large organization and certainly not to anyone
who works in government. The immediate and natural response to the
problem of scale might be to quit your job, set out on your own or in a
small team, and start enjoying a simpler and more productive life. But
you would very quickly find that being a solopreneur brings with it
innumerable headaches that were abstracted away when you were
working in a larger organization.
Why We Scale
In the words of Peter Drucker, “The purpose of an organization is to
enable ordinary human beings to do extraordinary things.”1 The
fundamental reason organizations tend to grow is people desire to do
ever more extraordinary things. This is made possible by
economies of
scale. This means that organizations that double in size don’t necessarily
need twice as many accountants or twice as many factories; great

-- 34 of 353 --

increases in output and revenue don’t necessarily require great increases
in the infrastructure needed to maintain them. Research by Geoffrey
West, summarized in the book	
Scale: The Universal Laws of Life,
Growth, and Death in Organisms, Cities, and Companies, estimates that
organizations continue to benefit from economies of scale as they grow,
gaining a 10% efficiency with every doubling in size.2
Organizations also scale to address opportunity and competition.
With scale comes resiliency, influence, momentum, and attention.
Amazon more than doubled its head count from 2019 to 1.6 million
employees in 2021 to address increased demand and to leverage vertical
integration.3 Extreme scale requires extreme coordination but even
scaling beyond a single individual demands care.
The Costs of Scale
While scale has clear benefits, there are clear challenges and costs as well.
This book primarily addresses the challenge of how to enable teams to
operate effectively in spite of the very real costs that scale imposes on
effective action. To understand how teamwork is impeded by scale, we
first need to understand the human costs of scale. The very purpose for
which we assemble teams is undermined by the challenge of effectively
coordinating them.
The Human Costs of Scale
Scale should enable increased capability and leverage, yet most
organizations struggle to manage the scale they’ve created. We often
hear things like:
• “We can’t understand what’s going on.”
• “We can’t understand where we should focus.”
• “We need to do more with less.”

-- 35 of 353 --

• “We’re not aligned.”
• “We have too many tools, meetings, dependencies, and
interruptions.”
• “We have too much technical debt and work in progress (WIP).”
• “We spend too much time micromanaging or in the weeds.”
• “We’re always waiting for something out of our control to happen.”
• “We can’t retain/leverage/empower our talent.”
• “We’ve always done it this way; that won’t work here.”
There are also indications that something deeper is eroding our ability to
act effectively.
There are three specific human costs brought on by scale:
distraction,
disorientation, and
disengagement. Distraction is a result of the constant
interruptions, changing priorities, and demands on our attention.
Disorientation occurs from a lack of clarity and alignment toward what
matters most. Disengagement occurs when we resign ourselves to
treading water without a clear connection to value. (See also Figure 1.1.)
FIGURE 1.1: The Three Human Costs of Scale

-- 36 of 353 --

Working in larger groups multiplies distraction, which exacts an
enormous cost. According to the study “No Task Left Behind? Examining
the Nature of Fragmented Work” by Gloria Mark, Victor Gonzalez, and
Justin Harris, it takes roughly twenty-five minutes to refocus after
interruption.4
If we’re working on our own, we’re distractible enough. But the more
people we engage with, the greater the chances that one of them will
disrupt our attention at any time. Our distractions also lead us to
distract others, creating a cascade of interruptions that splinter across
the organization like space debris from an exploded satellite. This has
made focus one of the most endangered mental factors in the modern
world. There’s nothing more fatal to an organization’s ability to get
things done than a team that can’t focus on its goal. Scale only
exacerbates this problem.
While digital technologies enable coordination at far greater scale
and speed, they can make it even harder to get and stay oriented to what
matters most. The infinite profusion of information means that relevant
details are easily lost. The fast pace of change lends itself to
disorientation and to people moving at cross-purposes. Digital reality
can be more transient and individual, where individuals decouple from
each other far more easily than in physical reality. This means that
special effort needs to be made to keep people’s digital worlds in sync,
especially at the enterprise scale.
Orientation is required for alignment. Every layer of interaction in an
organization requires aligning the motivations, understandings, and
behaviors of different people. A simple way of understanding this
misalignment is shown in Figure 1.2. Even if a group of individuals are
observing the same challenge, every observer will have a different
perspective, leading to different perceptions, as is illustrated in Judy Katz
and Frederick Miller’s book	
Opening Doors to Teamwork and
Collaboration.5

-- 37 of 353 --

FIGURE 1.2: Misalignment in Teams
Perspectives, goals, and scope vary widely across individuals, across groups, and
over time.
Because of our unique perspectives, we may possess or lack key
information. Different people may also have different goals based on
what they see to be most important at that time. We can also have
different scopes of concern (wider or narrower, sooner or later, micro or
macro, strategic or operational) that function like different zoom levels.
Technologists are famous for zooming in on challenging technical details
when making a decision. Those who are considering a situation from a
greater distance may come to entirely different conclusions. All of these
different perceptions can offer complementary points of view, but it
takes effort to align.
The Gallup organization has tracked employee engagement metrics
for thirty years and summarized many of their conclusions in
First, Break
All the Rules. As of their most recent surveys, engagement among US
workers still hovers around 33%.6 According to Gallup’s	
State of the
Global Workplace: 2023 Report, disengaged employees cost the world an
unbelievable $8.8 trillion in lost productivity.7 Worker disengagement
means our innate motivation circuitry is not being activated by our work

-- 38 of 353 --

environment. This could be due to a lack of challenge, but more often it’s
due to a lack of purpose—or being too far removed from it. In these
situations, it is not clear how our work serves a beneficial purpose, apart
from a paycheck.
Daniel Pink’s bestselling book	
Drive: The Surprising Truth about
What Motivates Us identifies autonomy, mastery, and purpose as key
ingredients for maximum engagement.8 And Google’s Project Aristotle, a
study conducted by Google to identify the key factors that make a
successful team, found that sense of purpose was one of the five most
important factors for high-performing teams.9
While it may be tempting to think that finding a sense of purpose
requires changing jobs, the fastest and most powerful improvements
come from simply understanding the purpose of the business you’re in.
Scale makes this difficult, since in a large process, the real beneficiaries of
our work may be several steps removed from us.
The Organizational Costs of Scale
Scaling organizations brings with it special challenges. At an
organizational level, the human challenges just mentioned manifest as
misalignment. At scale, teams naturally become more distanced from the
customer, from each other, from the purpose of their work, and from
critical information. The critical feedback loop from customer need to
team activity is stretched and broken.
Distance or closeness, whether physical or mental, is described as “proximity” by
social scientists.10 Empathy, or a worker’s emotional connection to the challenges of a
customer, is a function of
relational proximity.11 Having a shared understanding with
coworkers is a function of
cognitive proximity. These two kinds of proximity predict
the likelihood of collaboration.

-- 39 of 353 --

Coordinating an organization means navigating the invisible world
of others’ minds by trying to align incentives, forge trust, and clearly
understand how to tackle the mountain of challenges and opportunities
each team faces. Navigating an organizational ecosystem requires
navigating an interdependent network of technical and social nodes (or
interconnected components) and understanding that it’s increasingly
challenging to consider any component or area of the organization in
isolation.
This invisible network is described in	
Wiring the Winning
Organization by Gene Kim and Steven Spear as the:
… social circuitry, the overlay of processes, procedures, routines, and norms that
enable people to do their work easily and well. While individual specialists are
focusing their attention on the problems immediately in front of them, this social
circuitry establishes the patterns by which information, ideas, materials, and services
flow, setting people up for success and integrating individual efforts for common
purpose.12
This social circuitry is invisible and easily overlooked. As
organizations scale, invisible gaps and misalignments become endemic.
Avoiding or mitigating these costs of scale requires engineering this
social circuitry to establish or reestablish a shared sense of purpose,
orientation, and activity.
The Paradox of Scale
Even in simple coordination activities, like playing a game of tug-of-war,
individual effort declines as group size grows. This loss of effort is known
as the Ringelmann effect: as more people are involved in a task, their
average performance decreases, with each participant tending to feel that
their own effort is not critical to overall performance.13
Despite that inefficiency, in 2016 Microsoft and Facebook researchers
conducted a study on forty-seven teams sized one to thirty-two people.

-- 40 of 353 --

They found that as team size increased, productivity of teams rose but
collaboration costs and errors both increased. The study revealed
valuable correlations between scale and performance: “We find that
individuals in teams exerted lower overall effort than independent
workers, in part by allocating their effort to less demanding (and less
productive) sub-tasks; however, we also find that individuals in teams
collaborated more with increasing team size.”14 In other words, large
teams necessitate increased collaboration, yet the default effect is each
contributor doing less.
In the end, the researchers found that “the largest teams
outperformed an equivalent number of independent workers, suggesting
that gains to collaboration dominated losses to effort.”15 To put it simply,
collaborative work is best, but it’s not our best work. The waste and cost
of collaboration grow significantly at scales beyond the “two-pizza team”
or “single-threaded team” popularized at Amazon16 to address efficiency
and scalability.17

-- 41 of 353 --

FIGURE 1.3: The Paradox of Scale Illustrated
The graph shows the relative amount of effort by each individual declining and the
prevalence of collaboration rising as the size of the team grows (more person-
hours).
Adapted from Andrew Mao et al. “An Experimental Study of Team Size and
Performance on a Complex Task.”
PLoS ONE 11, no. 4 (April 2016).
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153048.
The study highlights a few aspects of scale we’ll address later in the
book with an approach to improve collaborative workflow:
1. As an organization grows larger, it will tend to become more
inefficient. Effort is reduced and errors increase with scale unless
care is taken to offset these risks.
2. These costs are hidden since economies of scale can bring gains
that outpace the waste of poor coordination.
3. Cost and waste not only reduce company margins but also impact
customer and employee experience.
These hidden inefficiencies also explain how large and established
organizations can rapidly lose market share and crumble in the face of
more agile competitors. This is massively consequential when we
consider modern enterprise workflows comprising hundreds of teams

-- 42 of 353 --

and thousands of individuals as an interdependent network of
collaboration at scale.
Challenges of Collaborating at Scale
Despite the enormous inefficiencies of trying to operate in organizations
at scale, the incredible opportunities of the modern world and the
intensity of competition push organizations to constantly strive for
growth. Regardless of the challenges and the waste of large-scale
organizations, not acting is not an option. And acting slowly or
ineffectively is often as detrimental as not acting at all.
Given these constraints, we must find ways of working together that
are effective for businesses, customers, and the workers themselves.
Finding better ways of working together depends on finding a deeper
understanding of the systems we work in.
Organizations as Socio-Technical Systems
Modern businesses are best understood as socio-technical systems (the
combination of social and technical systems). Thinking well and
delivering value are challenging even for individuals. Scale amplifies the
challenge by complicating communication, coordination, and
collaboration. Several laws and theories relating to scale help us
understand organizational performance across socio-technical
boundaries:
• Weick’s Theory of Organizing:18 This theory suggests that
organizations are essentially systems for coordinating
interpretation and meaning. As organizations scale, the number of
interpretations and meanings that need to be managed can become
overwhelming, leading to communication challenges.

-- 43 of 353 --

• Complexity Theory:19 This theory illustrates how complexity will
increase nonlinearly with scale, making predictability and control
more challenging.
• Attention Economics:20 Herbert Simon’s theory states that as
information becomes more plentiful, attention becomes scarcer.
Attention is a prerequisite to clarity.
• Transaction Cost Economics:21 This theory aims to explain
how the costs of coordinating across a large organization can
outweigh the benefits of scale, leading to inefficiencies.
• Metcalfe’s Law:22 This law implies that the value of a network is
proportional to the square of the number of connected users. While
it primarily refers to the value of the physical network, it follows
that as a network grows, the complexity and cost of coordination
within that network increases as the square of the network size.
• Brooks’s Law:23 This law posits that adding more people to a late
software project only makes it later. It highlights the
communication overhead that comes with each new team member,
which can slow down a project rather than speed it up.
• Conway’s Law: Organizations that design systems (including
products and services) are constrained to produce designs that are a
copy of the communication patterns within the organization. As
organizations grow and diversify, maintaining coherent
communication becomes a challenge. Incoherent communication
patterns can result in incoherent systems that perform outdated
functions or are misaligned with current goals. Conway’s Law
works in the other direction as well. Maintaining fragmented
systems puts pressure on the organization to divide teams into
specialists for those systems. Winston Churchill captured the spirit
of this when he said, “We shape our buildings, and afterward our
buildings shape us.”24

-- 44 of 353 --

The common thread here is that as scale increases, complex and
consequential effects begin to threaten the performance of the
organization. Communication, coordination, and collaboration suffer.
This not only degrades operational performance but also begins to
degrade the very products and services the organization produces.
CASE STUDY
The Checkbox Project
“The Checkbox Project” is a case study published in the Fall 2023
DevOps Enterprise
Journal.25 It describes a seemingly simple task of adding a single checkbox to customer
billing that would fire an API call to resell a partner service and generate millions in revenue
with practically zero operational expenditure. It seemed like a clear home run but turned out
to be a painful exercise in the challenges of enterprise scale.
FIGURE 1.4: The Checkbox Project: Teams Involved
The effort spanned 10+ delivery teams for each of two lines of business (LOB) with
three channels for each LOB, each heavily reliant on shared services.
Source: Kamran Kazempour et al., “The Checkbox Project: Learnings for Organizing
for Outcomes,”
The DevOps Enterprise Journal 5, no. 2 (Fall 2023),
https://itrevolution.com/product/the-checkbox-project/.

-- 45 of 353 --

Implementing this change required navigating a complicated web of interdependencies:
product development, IT, billing, global legal and compliance, and marketing, to name a few.
All spanning and duplicated across multiple channels and lines of business.
Ultimately, delivery of the initiative required managed and close collaboration across
over sixty teams in multiple organizational hierarchies across multiple channels and
segments, including involvement from many coordination roles and shared services. In the
end, the project took over twelve months from conception to completion and cost the
company over $28 million to implement. Few stakeholders would consider it a success.
Managing the Invisible
We each understand value, clarity, and flow through our direct
experience. We understand the experience of receiving something
wonderful, deciphering some mystery, or having a feeling of progress.
But all three of those experiences become harder to access when we’re
dealing with invisible things, especially at scale.
Dominica DeGrandis’s book
Making Work Visible helped popularize
the challenge facing knowledge work organizations: our work is
invisible. But even physical work benefits from making work visible.26
The famous time and motion studies pioneered by Frederick Taylor
and Lillian and Frank Gilbreth were among the first efforts to track the
way work is performed over time. Their analysis led to doubling
productivity while also dramatically simplifying the work.27
While time and motion studies are largely focused on physical
activity, our modern work demands human creativity, innovation, and
dynamic collaboration. Even though they may have visible results,
software development tasks themselves, for example, are invisible. Task
management systems allow the work to be organized and visualized to a
degree. Over time, we might notice trends in the number, duration, or
allocation of these tickets. These can reveal patterns that are otherwise
impossible to see. But just like the time and motion study can be misused
to reduce human work to mechanistic and repetitive actions, misusing
task management can lead to unintended consequences.

-- 46 of 353 --

The most common mental model of work is that it’s like a 100-meter
race (not even a 100-meter relay race, just a race)—as if a team is a single
runner and can just pick up the pace, improve their conditioning, or
improve their technique. Comparing work to a race and your teams to
independent athletes obscures the complexity of work and leads to
proposed solutions that are little more than just hoping for magical
improvements.
Collaborative work is more like a construction project. You can
operate, even as a team, at peak performance and watch nothing
improve. Until you address dependencies—the permitting process, the
handoffs between trades, the supply chain for materials, the cost of
inventory, the effects of weather—your efforts will be wasted.
Knowledge work is like a construction project in which the raw
materials, the work being done, and the finished product are mostly
invisible. As Frederick Brooks said in
The Mythical Man-Month, “The
programmer, like the poet, works only slightly removed from pure
thought-stuff. He builds his castles in the air, from air, creating by
exertion of the imagination.”28
What a challenge! Working collectively to build “castles in the air,”
trying to coordinate invisible dependencies, and trying to understand
and improve the invisible process that unfolds over time. No wonder
most IT organizations are perceived as “black boxes” by those outside the
department.
There are equivalent issues in every department. There are delays
beyond our control, there are distractions and interruptions, there are
queues and unfinished work, there are shared services, and there are
approvals and standards. Until you leverage a paradigm that allows you
to see and address constraints, the impact of those constraints will
overpower any efforts you put into training, talent, tools, motivation,
methodology, or anything else. Without the right paradigm for work,
you could miss opportunities right under your nose.

-- 47 of 353 --

Conclusion
Scale within socio-technical systems exacts a massive human cost
through distraction, disorientation, and disengagement. Variations of
perspectives, goals, and scope across individuals amplify these effects.
Value, clarity, and flow become elusive, and our ability to collaborate and
act effectively breaks down. We can’t address issues we can’t clearly see
and understand. With a clear understanding of the specific impacts of
scale and the importance of visibility to address them, it’s time to talk
about solutions. There are many common approaches to dealing with
the challenges of scale. Let’s look at the typical approaches with a fresh
lens to identify the gaps that still exist in achieving effective action.
Key Takeaways
• Scale increases the distance between cause and effect; people’s perspectives,
priorities, and activities; and the ultimate value and purpose of their work.
• Distanced from the purpose of their work and from a shared view, people become
disengaged, disoriented, and distracted.
• These human costs limit the ability of teams to effectively and efficiently deliver
value.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 48 of 353 --

CHAPTER 2
Solutions to Scale
“In this exquisitely connected world, it’s never a question
of ‘critical mass.’ It’s always about critical connections.”
GRACE LEE BOGGS
PERHAPS YOU FIND YOURSELF in the middle of an effort or system of work that
feels slower, less clear, or less productive than it should. In the activity of
daily work, it may be unclear how to resolve dependencies, align
stakeholders, uncover constraints, measure performance, or focus
investment. It’s valuable to be able to quickly step back from the work to
improve the work. It’s important to check if the saw is dulled, if you’re using
the right tool, or if you’re even cutting down the right tree.
A painful truth of enterprise-scale solutions is that what works in one
case likely won’t work in another. Despite its massive scale and complexity,
Amazon stands as an example of an organization that dominates, pioneers,
pivots, experiments, and, after nearly a quarter of a century, shows no signs
of slowing down. But chances are your organization bears little resemblance
to Amazon. It’s also unlikely that, like Amazon, you can mandate a descaling
effort to break your organization down into smaller, independent teams that
can operate productively at scale.
Ever since childhood, we’ve been cautioned about the risks of trying to
be like anyone else. The same holds true in business. Copy and paste is not a
viable option. Existing solutions fall along a spectrum ranging from
prescriptive to
generative, as shown in Figure 2.1. Prescriptive methods take

-- 49 of 353 --

a centralized approach, relying on a small number of leaders or experts to
define precise structures for how teams should be organized and interact. By
contrast, generative methods take a distributed approach. They seek to bring
together stakeholders throughout the organization and facilitate discussions
and exercises in hopes of finding emergent solutions.
FIGURE 2.1: The Spectrum of Solution Approaches
The power of the distributed approach used in generative methods is
that you can engage everyone in the activity of cocreating solutions. When
people are involved in creating a solution themselves, they are more invested
in delivering the outcome. This is often called the “IKEA effect”—we value
things we build ourselves more than things we receive preassembled.1
The risk of this distributed approach is that it might take longer, and it’s
difficult to guarantee what conclusions contributors will come to. While it’s
important to get buy-in, individual contributors can lack important context
from looking at the business at a large scale in time or space. The generative
end can seem to demand a trust fall into the unknown. These generative
approaches can be challenging to convert into clear, actionable business
value.
The power of a prescriptive or centralized approach is that it provides
more clarity and direction. When insights are distributed across the
organization, they become invisible to most people. Those in positions of

-- 50 of 353 --

power can make clear statements about goals, structure, and priorities and
ensure that those messages are visible and amplified across the organization.
The main challenge with prescriptive methods, however, is that they
tend to be so heavy and constraining that the overhead of applying them
dramatically undermines the benefits. Prescriptive models like PRINCE2
have a considerable learning curve and training cost and require specially
trained experts and up-front budget approval. It can seem like the
prescriptive side demands “all or nothing” and requires massive investment
in learning and structure to get started or to scale.
Ultimately, any approach that hopes to solve the challenges of scale must
possess three characteristics to overcome the three
Ds of disengagement,
disorientation, and distraction:
1. Like the generative methods mentioned, the solution you choose
must engage all participants to ensure their perspectives are shared
and that they feel committed to the solution. This addresses the risk
of disengagement.
2. Like the prescriptive methods, the solution must be simple and
aligned with the organization’s strategic goals. This prevents the risk
of disorientation.
3. But unlike typical prescriptive approaches, the solution must also be
fast and easy to put into practice to quickly realize ROI. This avoids
the risk of distraction.
We seek interventions that are short, focused, and can yield results
before priorities change, keeping participants on a golden path toward their
target outcome.
Gaps in Existing Solutions
The common approaches to enabling large-scale collaboration typically
suffer from three gaps: an
alignment gap, a
visibility gap, and an
on-ramp
gap.

-- 51 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.2: The Three Gaps to Enabling Large-Scale Collaboration
The
alignment gap refers to the challenges of gathering support and
enthusiasm, establishing business value, and connecting contributors to
organizational needs and objectives. You can’t do everything, so the
organization needs to align its focus on what will deliver the results you
need.
The
visibility gap refers to the challenges of creating a shared picture of
goals and the current state and making that picture accessible to everyone
who’s involved and affected. To assemble a complete view of your landscape,
you must also include diverse, distributed perspectives. To navigate
effectively, you also must be able to see where you’re going. Creating a clear
view from current to future state is essential to help everyone move
together.
The
on-ramp gap refers to the challenges of getting started, restarting,
securing buy-in or investment, and building momentum. A key aspect of the
on-ramp gap is the challenge of meeting organizations where they are based
on their unique current state.
To truly hit a home run, any approach needs to accommodate the iron
triangle of constraints in any large enterprise: budget, scope, and schedule.
In other words, to satisfy the needs of a large, constrained, and inertia-
bound enterprise, a solution must be inexpensive, minimal, and quick to
pilot.

-- 52 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.3: The Iron Triangle of Constraints
In today’s landscape, most organizations lack an effective framework that
achieves these things: quickly setting a valuable target, understanding the
current state, and enabling effective action across a diverse group of
individuals.
The Cybernetic Connection
Any effective remedy to the problems of scale must also be based on scale-
free principles—i.e., principles that will hold true at any scale. Cybernetics is
one of the most influential intellectual movements of the twentieth century
and offers just such a scale-free explanation of how to accomplish goals.
Cybernetics introduced the idea that any attempt to navigate toward a
goal depends on effective control systems. A control system is a system that
uses feedback loops to continually adjust direction toward a target state.
Cybernetics can be applied to understand systems as simple as a thermostat
or as complex as a government. If your organization is like a plane,
cybernetics is how you effectively fly that plane.
James Martin’s 1995 book
The Great Transition describes his vision for an
enterprise of the future—a cybernetic corporation, or “cybercorp,”

-- 53 of 353 --

incorporating two aspects of advanced performance: (1) technology enabling
fast feedback, automation, scale, and new capabilities, and (2) employee
empowerment enabling productivity, focus, collaboration, and autonomy.
He decried the perils of separating “the business” and IT. Martin posited that
for an organization to reach peak performance in the digital future, it
needed to eliminate the gap between its people and its technology—across
the enterprise—creating a single cybernetic system.2
Terms like “digital transformation” are thrown around casually in the
media and in business discussions. It’s helpful to reflect on what a profound
change that implies: how much organizations already resemble cybercorps
but also how much inefficiency remains in the way our organizations
operate.
Thirty years ago, James Martin was among the last major authors to
point to cybernetics as a way of describing a possible future of work. (A
notable exception is Jeff Sussna’s
Designing Delivery.) Now that we’re living
in that future, it’s worth stepping back to understand what’s really
happening.
From a cybernetic point of view, every activity an organization takes to
keep moving in the right direction (whether management, training, IT
systems, etc.) is part of a control system, a cybernetic feedback loop (see
Figure 2.4 on page 22). (This loop echoes the elements of action loop we
present in the next chapter.) None of this is new. None of this is
controversial. But it
is challenging to put into practice, especially in large
groups.

-- 54 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.4: Cybernetic Feedback Loop
A cybernetic loop represents the flow of navigating change through targeting, sensing,
and response.
Everyone wants to feel like they have control over complex challenges.
Dynamic activities, such as riding a mountain bike, are exercises in control.
When we’re riding down a mountain path, our target is staying on the trail
and not wiping out. Our eyes, ears, and other senses are maximally engaged
to maintain clarity about our current operating conditions. A skilled
mountain biker will steer the front wheel and adjust their posture dozens of
times per second. The experience of flow is undeniable.
Such a sense of progress, clarity, and focus may feel inaccessible at work.
But perhaps that’s because we’ve not yet built the cybernetic control systems
needed to understand and act on the challenges at work. Our most
important work goal should not be just to survive the next quarter. The
most powerful goal is to engineer the experience of flow at work.
Understanding Work as a Flow
The primary challenge in business is how to enable a group of people to
work together effectively to deliver value to customers. Value is defined as
benefit compared with cost. Large organizations tend to organize people
into functional groups and hand work across in a sort of relay race from
customer need to customer satisfaction. The problem with these functional
silos (see Figure 2.5) is they end up operating not as a single relay team but as

-- 55 of 353 --

entirely separate teams that train independently and may have differing
goals.
FIGURE 2.5: A Siloed Organizational Structure
Silos are effective for personnel management but not for cross-organizational flow.
Imagine a relay race where each runner on the team trained alone and
then showed up hoping for smooth handoffs mid-race. Not only is that relay
team unlikely to perform well, but each racer on the team is also likely to
focus mostly on their own performance. Training and measuring
independently implies a lack of visibility into what everyone else is doing
and how all the contributions come together to deliver value. Runners may
spend many hours perfecting their stride but fumble the handoff, which is
an order of magnitude more impactful on the ultimate performance of the
team.
If we can only improve what we can see and we can only see a subset of
the overall flow of work, all our effort could be wasted in comparison to
addressing the weakest link in the chain of activities. If our visibility is
limited to a subset of the work process, we will direct improvement efforts
there. But if we fail to address the real constraint, our targeted
improvements won’t matter at best and could make things worse. (See
Figure 2.6.)

-- 56 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.6: Effects of Limited Visibility
In
The Great Transition, James Martin says, “A value stream is an end-to-
end collection of activities that creates a result for a ‘customer,’ who may be
the ultimate customer or an internal ‘end user’ of the value stream.”3 The
scope of a value stream is the complete loop from customer need to
customer satisfaction. A value stream represents a complete cybernetic
control system, consisting of a customer target, a change implementation,
and feedback processing.
Optimizing the value stream requires looking at this end-to-end work
process to increase value delivery while reducing costs such as delay. By
more effectively chaining together the work of each contributor, we
approach a state where a single piece of work “flows” without interruption
for the benefit of a customer.
Value stream optimization goes beyond optimization efforts that focus
only on narrow segments of the workflow. For example, Agile principles and
practices arose within the software development community to improve
flow and customer centricity. Agile improved outcomes but put pressure on
downstream deployment, infrastructure, and operations. DevOps later
emerged as a solution to address that downstream handoff and accelerated
delivery while improving outcomes.
Value stream optimization transcends DevOps to include the full process
of delivering value to customers. Improving flow within a single value
stream will shift the constraint elsewhere. Using the value stream as a
model, we can see opportunities to accelerate and improve outcomes across

-- 57 of 353 --

the entire flow from customer need to customer satisfaction. (See Figure
2.7.)
FIGURE 2.7: The Value Stream
The value stream, the full scope of activity needed to satisfy customers, passes through
multiple functional groups.
Making Flow Visible
To manage and optimize the flow of work, we must first
see the flow of
work. To reason about work effectively, we need to create a simple model
that represents this flow. In a large-scale working environment, no
individual has the full picture. That means we need to pool data and our
individual knowledge to create this model.
To do this, we engage in Value Stream Mapping, creating a visual
representation of the value stream based on our collective understanding. By
mapping the value stream (see Figure 2.8), we can measure performance and
identify improvement opportunities. Effectively, we are building a
representative model that is easy to see and understand so we can manage a
process that is otherwise invisible.

-- 58 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.8: A Simple Value Stream Map
In cybernetic terms, this is the act of creating a control system, a concept
we’ll return to later. On this basis, we can learn and adapt to improve value
delivery over time.
The classic Value Stream Map originated as a “Material and Information
Flow” diagram within the Toyota Production System (TPS). TPS is a
revolutionary approach to running an organization that led Toyota to
dominate the auto industry beginning in the 1980s. Central to TPS is the
idea of kaizen, or continuous improvement. This practice was summarized
by Mike Rother as the Improvement Kata in his seminal book
Toyota Kata:
Managing People for Improvement, Adaptiveness, and Superior Results,4 as
shown in Figure 2.9.

-- 59 of 353 --

FIGURE 2.9: The Toyota Production System’s Improvement Kata
Source: Mike Rother,
Toyota Kata: Managing People for Improvement, Adaptiveness,
and Superior Results (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009).
The Improvement Kata is a four-step pattern of establishing a target
condition, grasping the current condition, establishing the next target, and
iteratively working toward that target. The Improvement Kata itself is a
cybernetic loop, focused on continuous adjustment while navigating toward
a target goal.
This pattern is repeated in some of the most influential frameworks of
the modern day, as shown in Table 2.1.

-- 60 of 353 --

TABLE 2.1: Cybernetic Control Systems in Popular Decision Frameworks
Framework/
Methodology Target Sense Compare Compute Act
Lean Startup Set
hypothesis Measure Learn Build Build
OKRs Objectives Monitor key
results
Compare to
objectives
Compute
adjustments
Act on
adjustments
V2MOM Vision Obstacles Values Measures Methods
Scrum Sprint goal Standup Retrospective Identified
improvements Improvement
Balanced
Scorecard
Strategic
objectives
Monitor
perspectives
Compare to
objectives
Compute
strategy
Act on
strategy
DMAIC Define goal Measure Analyze Improve Control
Lean Define
value
Map the
value stream
Measure the
value stream
against target
outcome
Identify
constraint &
causes
Create
flow/establish
pull/strive for
perfection
TQM Quality
objectives
Monitor
metrics
Compare to
objectives
Compute
corrective
measures
Implement
measures
OODA Mission
aim Observe Orient Decide Act
PDSA/PDCA Plan Do/observe Check/study Check/study Act/adapt
Toyota
Production
System
Operational
excellence
Observe
(Gemba
walks,
Andon)
Identify
waste (muda,
mura, muri)
Kaizen bursts Implement
changes
(jidoka, just-
in-time,

-- 61 of 353 --

continuous
improvement)
Flow Engineering is a set of practices that builds on the foundations of
cybernetics and the Toyota Production System to provide a lightweight and
iterative way of building value, clarity, and flow. Armed with these
techniques for groups of people to externalize and evolve their
understandings, we can develop clear focus to facilitate collective action.
In the next chapter, we’ll introduce the three elements of effective action
(value, clarity, and flow) as a cybernetic model that forms the foundation for
a better approach to enable effective action at scale.
Key Takeaways
• Common solutions often suffer from an alignment gap, a visibility gap, and an on-ramp
gap.
• Value streams provide a model for cross-organizational performance visibility,
measurement, and management.
• Cybernetics provides a model for effective action to drive performance improvement.
• Our best methods for driving effective action leverage the cybernetic loop of targeting,
sensing, and responding.
• We must leverage the learning of other organizations, but we can’t copy success or
experience.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 62 of 353 --

CHAPTER 3
The Elements of Action
“Do what you can, with what you have, where you are.”
Theodore Roosevelt
SCALE BRINGS MANY CHALLENGES. But perhaps the most insidious are the
difficulties of developing and sustaining	
value,	
clarity, and	
flow, the
fundamental elements of effective individual and collective action.
Value
informs direction,
clarity provides understanding, and
flow lets us get
things done. When these elements are present, effective action is
possible. When any are missing, effective action is difficult or impossible.
These three elements are critical for establishing and maintaining
effective collective action at scale.
Value broadly describes our individual and shared preferences for
some outcomes over others. Essentially, it’s why we’re in business. Value
drives the behavior of organizations on a macroscale and of individuals
on a microscale. Value sets the target to be reached by our actions. Value
is the pleasant experience of something that solves a problem or fulfills a
wish.
Clarity describes the ability to accurately understand the key aspects
of our situation. To have clarity means that our mental models align
correctly with our observations. Because each of our perspectives and
mental models is limited, building shared clarity in a group enables a
more reliable perception.

-- 63 of 353 --

Flow means unobstructed action that emerges from the effective
pursuit of value. It refers to smooth, steady, sustainable activity that is
both predictable and satisfying. Flow is the delicate balance between
execution and adaptation, allowing us to circumvent obstacles and
continually experience progress. Individuals are at their best when they
can sustain a state of psychological flow, and teams are at their best
when handoffs from one person to the next lead smoothly to the
creation of value for the customer.
While our target is collective flow, the same factors apply at both a
collective and individual level. (See Figure 3.1.) It’s impossible to achieve
individual flow in a collective environment full of friction, delays, and
interruptions. One of the principles of cybernetics is that similar
patterns can be seen at every scale. This book is aimed at providing you
with clear practices to improve collective flow across individuals and
teams and enable individual flow as a by-product of that effort.
FIGURE 3.1: Collective and Individual Flow
Flow exists across collective activities and within individual work. The two levels
are interdependent.
These three qualities (value, clarity, and flow), while common in our
language, are often hard to establish. And once gained, they are easily
lost. The connection to value may fade over time. Clarity can become
muddied. Flow can become blocked or slowed as conditions change. A
problem with any one of these three qualities can spell disaster for a

-- 64 of 353 --

team or an organization. And these problems are exacerbated with scale.
(See Figure 3.2 for more.)
FIGURE 3.2: Effects of the Three Elements of Action
Flow without direction or clarity leads us on a winding path full of waste and
confusion. Value and clarity enable you to build high-speed railways for flow.
How Value, Clarity, and Flow Interrelate
Value, clarity, and flow are mutually dependent. Our orientation or sense
of value dictates what information we seek and how we interpret what
we see. Thus, value is preliminary to building clarity. Clarity, in turn,
allows us to see where we have opportunities or constraints and thus
enables action. In particular, a high degree of clarity is required to
achieve the skillful and continually adapting type of action we describe
as flow. Flow makes optimal use of our energy to develop value, which
unlocks new possibilities as we receive feedback. Flow enables the cycle
to continue or accelerate. This mutually supportive relationship is
shown in Figure 3.3.

-- 65 of 353 --

FIGURE 3.3: The Three Elements of Action
The elements of action—value, clarity, and flow—are interdependent and feed each
other.
A key aspect of the three elements of action is that they apply at any
scale. As individuals, we must go through the loop of identifying value,
building clarity, and enabling flow on an ongoing basis, shown in Figure
3.4 (see page 32). At larger scales, both teams and entire organizations
must do the same: set a target, understand their current state, and take
action collectively. The problem of scale emerges when teams or
individuals move in separate directions without establishing shared
value, clarity, and flow.

-- 66 of 353 --

FIGURE 3.4: Cybernetic Loop with the Elements of Action
Value, clarity, and flow summarize the cybernetic loop.
As is represented in Figure 3.5, value, clarity, and flow help to align
teams for collective action. Value represents the shared goal of the team
or organization, clarity allows the team to understand a path to that goal,
and flow reveals the optimum path to that goal.
FIGURE 3.5: The Elements of Action: Value, Clarity, and Flow
Value is our target; clarity allows us to understand a path to that target; and flow is
about optimizing that path.
Conclusion

-- 67 of 353 --

Effective action depends on value, clarity, and flow. And effective action
at scale requires those elements to be shared across individuals and
teams. Human collaboration doesn’t scale naturally. Varied perspectives,
goals, and contexts breed too much confusion when trying to work
toward a common purpose. Confusion, waste, and friction are the
leading causes of transformation failures.
Organizations rise or fall depending on their systems of
collaboration. Systems of collaboration require a foundation of value,
clarity, and flow. As we’ll see in the upcoming chapter, mapping is a
lightweight superpower for building the three elements of action.
Different types of mapping can be used to clarify challenges with goals,
processes, or dependencies. And mapping can be scaled and repeated to
meet the demand for change.
Mapping in the form of Flow Engineering is ideal for effective
collaboration and is the process for developing value, clarity, and flow. In
the next chapter, we’ll demonstrate how a clear sequence of collaborative
mapping activities can identify value, create clarity, and enable flow.
Key Takeaways
• The elements of action (value, clarity, and flow) are invisible factors that are missing
in considerations of business in the digital age.
• Because organizations rise or fall depending on their systems for effective action,
value, clarity, and flow are critical factors for organizational performance.
• Collaborating on making work (and obstacles to work) visible is a powerful method
for building value, clarity, and flow.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 68 of 353 --

CHAPTER 4
Flow Engineering
“In a dialogue, each person does not attempt to make
common certain ideas or items of information that are
already known to him. [They are] creating something
new together.”
DAVID BOHM,
On Dialogue
WE DISCUSSED IN CHAPTER 2 that the distance inherent in scaled
organizations leads to disengagement, disorientation, and distraction.
We looked at how tackling the gaps in solutions requires a rapid start,
alignment from leadership to contributors, and visibility from start to
finish. In this chapter, we take a look at collaborative mapping as a
superpower to counteract the costs of scale.
Mapping can be highly effective in gaining alignment and action in
teams. It’s visual, interactive, and collaborative, which makes it highly
engaging. It provides a space to pull together contributors and context,
which allows a team to orient themselves as a group. It gives you a
platform to distill many perspectives into something well-defined,
focused, and shared, which enables clear next steps. The act of mapping
enables you to learn by doing. Armed with the right methods for
mapping, you can counteract disengagement, disorientation, and
distraction. Additionally, with the right series of maps, you can develop
value, clarity, and flow and quickly enable effective action.

-- 69 of 353 --

The Abilene Paradox1 describes a situation where a group collectively decides on a
course of action that is counter to the preferences of most or all of the individuals in
the group. It’s based on a story of a family who collectively decides to take a long,
uncomfortable trip to Abilene—despite none of them individually wanting to go—
because each mistakenly believes the others want to go. The paradox occurs when
members incorrectly believe their own preferences are contrary to the group’s and,
therefore, do not raise objections. This results in a situation where no one is happy
with the outcomes, even though everyone believes it’s what the group wants. In
collaborative environments, a lack of clarity and alignment can take you places
nobody wants to go.
Maps as Rosetta Stones
Maps can function as a Rosetta Stone, translating the distinct languages
in an organization, such as “business” and “tech”. The map bridges the
perspectives of each side, serving almost as a mediator. Typically, when
two people are looking at the same problem or the same set of data, they
are perceiving different things based on their perspectives, their
backgrounds, and so forth.
But when they jointly build maps, two individuals can construct a
mental model that synthesizes both of their views. The map allows them
to decode each other’s language, pointing them both toward the same
understanding (Figure 4.1). The maps in Flow Engineering aim to address
the gaps in understanding that arise from silos of activity, concern, and
visibility.

-- 70 of 353 --

FIGURE 4.1: The Power of a Map
Maps allow individuals to have higher-quality conversations on specific areas of
focus.
Value Stream Mapping is an extremely powerful technique for
driving performance improvement in organizations. It’s even easy to
start. So why isn’t everyone doing it all the time?
We often hear some version of the same complaint when Value
Stream Mapping is brought up in enterprises: “We want to do it. We
know we have to do it, but we’re not ready for it.” Despite the value,
many leaders don’t feel they can take the time, secure commitment or
budget, learn the techniques, or try something new. Some leaders who
are familiar with Value Stream Mapping associate the practice only with
manufacturing or feel it can’t be adapted to their complex environment.
It’s easy to put off adoption of this technique in favor of the status
quo. You may be convinced you can’t do it yourself because traditional
Value Stream Mapping has highly specialized language, symbols, and an
official ISO standard. It can be challenging to connect a mapping exercise
to higher-level objectives to establish alignment and justify the effort.
These challenges are some of the primary reasons for creating a simple,
sequential mapping approach for organizations that need to act, not just
map.
Introducing Flow Engineering
Based on the need to enable effective collective action, we’ve developed a
series of mapping practices to help teams arrive at shared clarity that we

-- 71 of 353 --

call Flow Engineering. Flow Engineering embodies these activities as a
structured set of visual mapping exercises that draw out insights and
align the efforts of a group of collaborators. If you can host a board game,
you can host these mapping exercises.
Flow Engineering builds upon mapping’s benefits to go beyond
engagement, alignment, and focus. It enables effective collective
action.
Flow Engineering allows us to identify value by connecting current state
context to a clear target outcome. It connects that outcome to specific
benefits for customers and stakeholders. It keeps that value present as a
north star so that contributors can make the best decisions about what
will help boost and uncover value through their efforts.
Flow Engineering allows us to build clarity by making it easy for
contributors to connect the dots from efforts, activities, and
improvements to the most critical focus for the organization. Based on a
more complete and holistic view of the full system of work, everyone can
grasp their place in improving the system. The minimal design enhances
clarity by avoiding a lot of less valuable context and noise.
Finally, Flow Engineering allows us to enable flow not only by
uncovering the constraint most affecting the flow of work but also by
building relationships, which unblock conversational and informational
flow across stakeholders and contributors. By aligning everyone to one
target outcome, one stream, and one constraint, everyone can move
forward together rather than against or away from each other. The
concise format makes it easier for teams to step away from daily
distractions and gain clarity, so they can come back to daily work with
renewed energy, awareness, and focus.
Five key Flow Engineering maps enable the three elements of action:
1. Outcome Map: To identify your target outcome.
2. Current State Value Stream Map: To reveal the current state
and constraints of your workflow.

-- 72 of 353 --

3. Dependency Map: To identify dependencies by studying
constraints.
4. Future State Value Stream Map: To create a future state
definition of flow.
5. Flow Roadmap: To organize insights, actions, and ownership
into an improvement roadmap.
You can see how each map supports value, clarity, and flow in Figure
4.2.
FIGURE 4.2: Value, Clarity, and Flow Woven through all Flow Engineering Maps
Solid lines indicate a direct contribution, dotted lines indicate indirect
contribution.
These mapping exercises are designed to guide you through the
essential steps to establishing team flow. They’re adaptable and
extendable to meet the unique needs of your team(s). And importantly,
they are quick, clear, and easy to execute, allowing teams to remain agile
and move at the speed of change.

-- 73 of 353 --

FIGURE 4.3: Five Maps of Flow Engineering
The full set of Flow Engineering exercises involves creating five maps: an Outcome
Map, a Current State Value Stream Map, a Dependency Map, a Future State Value
Stream Map, and a Flow Roadmap.

-- 74 of 353 --

Filling the Three Gaps
Flow Engineering addresses the challenges presented by the alignment,
on-ramp, and visibility gaps, as seen in Table 4.1:
TABLE 4.1: Addressing the Three Gaps through Flow Engineering
Need
Gaps
Alignment On-Ramp Visibility
Establish and maintain focus on a valuable target ✓ ✓ ✓
Visual and collaborative in real time ✓ ✓ ✓
Flexible and easily integrated into current practices ✓ ✓
Accessible to aspiring and novice facilitators ✓
Inclusive and equitable ✓ ✓ ✓
Remote friendly ✓ ✓ ✓
Simple, quick, and affordable ✓ ✓ ✓
Scalable from pilot to enterprise-wide ✓ ✓ ✓
Complete program to address flow challenges ✓ ✓ ✓
Has its own flow (obviously) ✓
With the goal of fostering the three elements of action, the maps of
Flow Engineering each specifically serve one of the three elements but
also support the others as a secondary benefit (as shown in Table 4.2). As
we introduce each map in later chapters, we’ll share which practices
they’re based on and viable substitutes for each should you have an
existing practice in place or a substitute you’d like to employ instead.

-- 75 of 353 --

TABLE 4.2: Each Map Serves at Least One of the Elements of Action
Map Primary goal Secondary benefits
Outcome Map Assemble context and
identify value
Provide clarity and alignment across
multiple perspectives
Current State Value
Stream Map
Clearly identify the most
impactful constraint
Build clarity on current state
workflow and performance
Dependency Map Build clarity on causal
factors
Build an artifact to share with
external stakeholders
Future State Value
Stream Map Define improved flow Identify valuable experiments and
actions to improve flow
Flow Roadmap Prioritize and plan flow
improvements
Provide clarity on next steps and
flow from today to future goals
Next, we’ll look at each of the five maps of Flow Engineering, go over
how to get started, and show you how to facilitate your team’s progress
through value, clarity, and flow.
The five mapping exercises in this book are presented as Liberating Structures.
Liberating Structures are microstructures or patterns of interaction that can be used
by groups to engage and enable all participants. They are based on principles of
complexity science and follow a consistent format to make them easy to facilitate and
engaging for participants. You can find more information in the book
The Surprising
Power of Liberating Structures by Henri Lipmanowicz and Keith McCandless or at
liberatingstructures.com.
When to Start Flow Engineering
If you find yourself in a large-scale enterprise environment, at any
moment it’s likely you’re faced with at least one of the following

-- 76 of 353 --

circumstances:
• You need to cut costs, boost efficiency, or improve time to market.
• You’re planning in the midst of or recovering from a reorg.
• Your calendar is being eaten up by meetings.
• You’re acquiring or have been acquired.
• You need to onboard staff into a complicated workflow.
• You just need to figure out what’s going on, where to focus, and
what to do.
Each one of these is a great opportunity to map, so let’s look at how
we can make it work.
Where Flow Engineering Happens
Steve started mapping with clients before work was shifted to remote-
first, when groups could routinely be present in the same room to map.
The energy, sense of connection, and tangibility of an in-person
workshop can’t be matched in a virtual space. But virtual mapping has
many advantages. It’s far easier for everyone to work at once, there’s no
facilitator blocking the board, and handwriting is never a problem. It’s
also far easier to start than booking a conference room with the ideal
equipment. With virtual mapping, you can easily export, share, preserve,
and update the results. You can save a lot of time working across teams
and sessions by using templates. Even if you have a fully colocated team,
you might consider virtual mapping to capture all of those benefits along
with the advantages of in-person activity.
Flow Engineering Tools and Timeline
Any collaborative visual tool will work well for these maps in a virtual or
hybrid environment. There are dozens of free tools that allow for real-

-- 77 of 353 --

time collaboration, and many offer anonymous voting and other
powerful facilitation capabilities.
The important part is to build the maps collaboratively or at least get
fast and varied feedback from everyone involved and affected. These days
that means online, but this is all possible with a dry-erase board, paper,
sticky notes, or almost anything you can write on together. For each
map, you’ll likely need two hours for an extremely skilled facilitator with
prior experience or three hours for a new attempt.
Who’s Involved in Flow Engineering
It’s important to involve representation from at least the responsible and
accountable parties within a given value stream. That means if design is
part of the stream, someone from design should be present during
mapping. That also means that leadership and those who are able to
change the system, workflow, and team must be present and involved.
Once you identify your key bottlenecks, you can narrow the involved
parties to those who are critical to those areas. In general, it’s good to
include as many voices and perspectives as possible, but we find that
twelve people is the maximum manageable size.
Facilitators are essential for collaboration. They can alleviate
participants’ fears, encourage creativity, and create a safe space for
sharing ideas. They have the ability to open up and expand discussions
while also narrowing down and refining them. Ideally, the facilitator has
no skin in the game. They’re neutral and supportive of the group’s
process. This helps move activity forward and keep it out of the weeds.
An easy guide for facilitators is shared in Table 4.3.

-- 78 of 353 --

TABLE 4.3: General Facilitator Rules of Engagement
✓ Facilitators talk as little as possible outside of guiding the mechanics of the
process; they let the participants own most of the dialogue.
✓
Facilitators should caution any individual from talking too long; aim to stay
within the duration of an elevator ride. In a larger group, a single sentence
constraint can keep the effort moving.
✓ Promote a standard, non-disruptive interruption method (i.e., hand raise) to
provide participants a way to voice their thoughts.
✓ Encourage participants to reach out to other participants who haven’t
spoken to ensure we hear from everyone.
✓ Keep participants comfortable with ranges and guesses; trust but verify with
the group.
✓
Facilitators emphasize the need to stay focused on the time horizon in
question. If we’re looking at the current state, avoid talking about solutions
or how things ought to be.
With all that said, you’re ready to dive in. It’s worth noting here that
once you have completed the full Flow Engineering mapping sequence,
you can remap maps individually depending on your need. Say, for
example, your team still doesn’t seem like it’s aligned on a target
outcome, you can revisit Outcome Mapping. Or, if you feel that maybe
you’re missing a dependency, you can go back to Dependency Mapping.
CASE STUDY
What Flow Engineering Enables
One of Steve’s earliest clients was a Fortune 100 company with massive scale and
resources. They could execute any initiative they focused on and deploy incredible amounts
of support to achieve their desired outcomes. The only challenge was choosing the right

-- 79 of 353 --

focal point and aligning all of the stakeholders toward that objective. This is no small feat,
especially with the complexity we face with modern knowledge work.
This organization had tens of millions of dollars to spend on improvements and
automation with the aim of reducing time to market. The department leader hired some
new staff to assess what they were doing differently than other successful organizations like
Google and Facebook. They discovered that deployment automation was common among
all these big players but was something they didn’t have. Reasonably enough, they formed
the hypothesis that they would go to the board and ask for the budget to roll it out.
They were about to follow the typical enterprise path and deploy millions of dollars
toward automating deployments, the stage in the value stream when new packaged code is
distributed to servers to be enabled for use by customers. Sounds like a great idea if you
believe deployment will be improved through further automation. It would surely make the
release process faster and simpler and perhaps even improve quality. What’s not to love?
But step back a moment and consider the larger picture. If they pick deployment
automation as their primary focus, they’re making an assumption that it represents the best
opportunity for improvement. How do they know that?
The budgetary process in the organization required that they make a case for any large
investment, which is typically sponsored by a key stakeholder. In the past, they would point
to industry best practices, aspirational examples, models and frameworks, and other
resources outside the organization. They’d also compile opinions from trusted advisers who
leveraged the same resources, as well as their own perspectives from within the
organization. Typically, this doesn’t follow a formal structure or process. This means they
have no way of truly inspecting how the decision is made. They’re not able to check the math
and ensure the recommendation is the best one, given all the information available. They’re
operating on assumption and opinion.
On this occasion, the leadership team wanted to make a data-driven case to their board
for funding. They wanted to be sure. They wanted to build and foster trust between the
business and technology groups involved to reach a higher level of collaboration. The
mandate was to collect data on the release process to support the proposal for automating
deployment.
Consider yourself in the situation of our large, Fortune 100 enterprise. If you were able to
ask for resources to spend in a few areas to tackle your most critical opportunities for the
next year, what would you want to have at your disposal? How would you answer questions
like “Why this?” or “Why now?” with confidence?
To address these questions in advance and ensure they had, in fact, picked the highest-
priority opportunities for investment, the client engaged Steve to facilitate Value Stream
Mapping their release process. Within a few hours of collaborative workshopping, it became

-- 80 of 353 --

clear that not only was artifact deployment a minor portion of the overall value stream, but
there were also two other big bottlenecks waiting nearby.
The actual bottlenecks were in environment updates and acceptance testing. The
bottleneck in acceptance testing was a surprise to everybody. The QA process had been
operating in a stable state for a very long time. Nobody had been paying attention to it. Of
course, it hadn’t gone entirely unnoticed; some people had been talking about this
“environment update” thing for ages, but they couldn’t convince anybody to spend any time
on it because they didn’t have a way of describing it properly. They did have a visual method
of showing the data to make their case; they were just arguing.
When you’re just arguing, you’re only as good as your negotiation skills, your role power,
your experience, your credibility, your social capital, all these things that have nothing to do
with the facts—making it a waste of time, in most instances. However, with Value Stream
Mapping, all of a sudden these people who had been complaining about environment
updates for years felt vindicated. They felt empowered knowing that now everyone could
clearly see what they’d been trying to say for years.

-- 81 of 353 --

FIGURE 4.4: A Segment of the Full Value Stream Map
This mapping exercise disproved the assumption that automating artifact
deployment would make a meaningful improvement. Two other bottlenecks were
found instead.
By collecting the data across the value stream, three major opportunities for
improvement were revealed, with the smallest being an order of magnitude more impactful
than deployment automation. All of the stakeholders involved could see the same picture,
the same data, and the same insight. Not only could they see the data pointing to three
major opportunities within the value stream, but these opportunities could also be easily
prioritized based on data collected on timing, quality, and value.
Let’s review the outcomes of this investment, which took only a few hours of mapping:
• Twenty million dollars of investment rerouted to where it would have a dramatic
impact.
• Eighteen months of time wasted on the wrong improvement was avoided.
• Stakeholders and contributors who had never met (yet worked in the same value
stream) built relationships and understanding.
• The data enabled clear prioritization based on the relative investment and trade-offs.

-- 82 of 353 --

• The department lead avoided an embarrassing, wasteful misstep and could instead
present a clear and data-backed case for a preferable alternative.
• Not only leadership but each stakeholder and contributor inside and beyond the value
stream had a visual artifact to aid common understanding and productive dialogue.
• The organization gained a new tool to understand their environment, make valuable
decisions, and build trust across business and technology groups.
One stakeholder, a program manager overseeing their transformation efforts, described
the value of the exercise with a shocking statement: “I’ve been here for nineteen years, and
this is the first time I’ve seen our process from start to finish!” This case illustrates a number
of benefits provided by a mapping-first approach to improvement. A fresh, minimal
approach to mapping fit the need in terms of not only speed of creation but also simpler
understanding and clearer insight.
Conclusion
The mapping practices in Flow Engineering are not a one-size-fits-all
approach. And Flow Engineering is not a copy-and-paste methodology,
which we know doesn’t work. It’s not a heavy framework that imposes a
specific structure or operating model onto your company. Instead, it
involves creating clarity with a particular team for that team and based
on their unique situation. In the process of discovery, mapping, and
definition, each team learns about how to improve performance by
connecting their unique target outcome to the actual work that will
deliver it. They reveal the constraints, obstacles, and insights that often
stay hidden behind the scenes. And key information can be made visible,
including the diverse perspectives across the value stream.
This process of choosing direction, mapping the business landscape,
and navigating is at the heart of Flow Engineering. The ultimate goal of
these efforts is to sustainably improve the flow of value to customers.
In the chapters that follow in Part 2, we introduce the five maps,
which each serve a distinct purpose. The purpose of these five mapping
exercises is summarized in Table 4.4. It’s important to understand the
underlying purpose of each exercise and what it seeks to overcome. Once

-- 83 of 353 --

we understand the purpose, we can adapt the mapping process or
substitute a comparable process to meet the needs of our teams.
TABLE 4.4: Purposes and Benefits of the Five Flow Engineering Exercises
Mapping Exercise Purpose Risk It Averts
Outcome Mapping Align all members of a team
around the value they need to
deliver.
Investing in irrelevant
improvements.
Current State Value
Stream Mapping
Clarify the most likely constraints
in an end-to-end workflow.
Optimizing a process that is
not the constraint.
Dependency Mapping Enhance the team’s clarity around
likely constraints.
Inadequate understanding
of the constraint.
Future State Mapping Jointly envision a value stream
with improved flow.
Failing to create a visible
target for change.
Flow Roadmapping Define the minimum set of steps
to achieving improved flow.
Failing to effectively act on
insights.
Flow Engineering can also include other visualizations and practices
beyond these five maps if they help organizations understand what will
deliver their target outcome.
Flow Engineering is about improving flow via collaborative mapping.
You can create and customize your own unique version for your
organization and its needs based on the goals, principles, and practices
described in this book. In Part 2, we’ll go through the details and
instructions for each of the five maps of Flow Engineering, beginning
with the Outcome Map.

-- 84 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Collaborative, visual mapping is a superpower for knowledge work. It’s remote-
friendly, persistent, and easily shared.
• Flow Engineering is not a one-size-fits-all approach but rather involves designing
improved flow within a particular value stream or team for their situation based on
their unique target outcome.
• Flow Engineering was designed to address alignment, on-ramp, and visibility gaps
and to reduce disengagement, disorientation, and distraction.
• Flow Engineering is easy to start, justify, and apply, so you can start doing it today.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 85 of 353 --

PART 2
Mapping the Landscape
OceanofPDF.com

-- 86 of 353 --

CHAPTER 5
Outcome Mapping
“To begin with the end in mind means to start with a
clear understanding of your destination.”
STEPHEN R. COVEY
WHEN WE START ANY JOURNEY, we need to know what our destination is
before we can effectively navigate. Similarly, the first challenge to tackle
in the process of Flow Engineering is clearly defining our desired
outcome.
An outcome in the scope of Flow Engineering is the future state you
want to be in within a set amount of time. Typically, we prefer to look six
months into the future. This generally allows us enough time to
implement a change and means minimal risk that conditions may
change and disengage, disorient, or distract the group. A possible
outcome could be, “We are delivering value to customers twice as often.”
Or, “We have cut production defects by 50%.” We define our desired
outcome and the path to achieving it by inviting team members to build
an Outcome Map.
Envisioning a desired future is a technique for setting direction that’s
been a key aspect of strategy since Teleology emerged under Aristotle.1
Norbert Wiener describes cybernetics as based on “teleological
mechanisms.”2 Outcome Mapping is a structured practice that brings a

-- 87 of 353 --

team or group of colleagues together to identify value (i.e., their most
important goal) and how to move toward it together.
Outcome Mapping primes the team for thinking in terms of
outcomes (a desired future state) and delivering customer value.
Mapping the desired outcome from the outset gives context and purpose
to all the subsequent mapping exercises. If teams dive into later maps
without this preparation, improvement activities will tend to be
unfocused and fail to yield a meaningful impact for the organization.
A 2020 research report by Boston Consulting Group highlighted
three key questions that companies need to ask when attempting a
digital (or any other) transformation:3
1. Why are we doing this?
2. What should we do?
3. How do we implement the transformation?
As shown in Figure 5.1, Outcome Mapping establishes value by
answering the question, “Why are we doing this?” while building the
foundation for clarity and flow. In future chapters, we’ll take a look at
how Value Stream and Dependency Maps bring clarity by tackling the
issue of “What should we do?” Finally, Future State Maps and Flow
Roadmaps open the door to flow by asking, “How do we implement the
transformation?”
FIGURE 5.1: Outcome Mapping Primarily Serves to Identify Value

-- 88 of 353 --

What Is Outcome Mapping?
Outcome Mapping is a collaborative workshop to help a group of
stakeholders clarify value (i.e., their primary goal and direction). Its goal
is to focus the team while surfacing doubts, testing assumptions, and
enabling the emergence of new insights. Just like with the other maps in
Flow Engineering, Outcome Mapping accelerates change efforts with
only a modest investment of time and forethought. Outcome Mapping
helps the team start to define a clear roadmap toward the value they
seek. It answers the following questions:
• Does everyone clearly understand our target objective?
• If another issue disrupts our focus, is it clear how to prioritize?
When you make your primary outcome clear, teams understand
what’s safe to ignore. This helps teams clarify what’s in or out of scope,
how much detail is needed, and, most importantly, how everyone can
contribute to making the target outcome a reality.
As shown in Figure 5.2, there are five stages to Outcome Mapping:
1. Outcome Discovery:
What is our target?
2. Defining the Target Outcome:	
What goal(s) do we want to
achieve?
3. Defining Benefits:
Why does this outcome matter?
4. Defining Obstacles:
What could get in the way?
5. Defining Next Steps:
How are we going to proceed?

-- 89 of 353 --

FIGURE 5.2: The Five Stages of Outcome Mapping
It’s possible to create an Outcome Map within a quick conversation
to clarify, align, and drive action. The map in Figure 5.3 (see page 56) was
created during a ten-minute conversation and produced an artifact that
could be shared, referenced, and evolved over time. A rough Outcome
Map could be expanded into a more detailed map at a later date; it’s a
living document that over time individuals can (and will) edit, comment
on, or vote on.

-- 90 of 353 --

FIGURE 5.3: A Rapid Outcome Map
Est. time: Ten minutes to value, clarity, and what’s next.
Why Outcome Mapping Works: Working Backward to Leap
Forward
A key principle of cybernetics is to start by identifying a target (or
desired) outcome and then work to reduce the gap between the
present
state and that
target state. Former Amazon executives Colin Bryar and
Bill Carr credit the practice of “working backward” as a key element of
the organization’s dramatic achievement. Working backward involves
beginning with a clear definition of a desired target state (outcome) and
using that target to guide decisions and actions.4 The same approach has

-- 91 of 353 --

been employed in effective collaborative efforts in many fields. The
underdog 2002 Oakland A’s captured in the book and movie
Moneyball
reverse engineered wins to on-base percentage.5 The Natural Step uses a
working backward approach called “backcasting” that paints a vision for
the future to drive sustainable urban development.6 Accordingly, the five
stages of Outcome Mapping aim to draw out different aspects of the
value being sought by beginning with the end in mind.
Outcome Discovery
The first stage, outcome discovery, answers the question, “What is our
target?” The discovery stage is an initial, pre-mapping exercise that
provides an opportunity for stakeholders to surface and share all the
relevant context and concerns. This is particularly valuable if you’re an
outside facilitator coming in to guide the practices of Flow Engineering,
but it can also be surprisingly revealing to even the most seasoned
members of a group.
Typically, a group will come together to conduct the discovery phase
of an Outcome Map whenever there is a feeling of confusion,
dissatisfaction, misalignment, frustration, competing priorities, etc.
Table 5.1 outlines some common vague conditions that could become
actionable if transformed into a target outcome.

-- 92 of 353 --

TABLE 5.1: Common Situations That Can Be Transformed into Actionable Outcomes via
Outcome Discovery
Issues Inside an Organization Competitive/External Challenges
Do not have clear OKRs and KPIs. Financial constraints.
Low organizational performance. Lacking strategic direction.
eNPS stagnant or dropping. Lack of clarity around the customer.
Cross-organizational misalignment. Cannot convince stakeholders to act.
Acting like a “feature factory.” NPS stagnant or dropping.
Tech debt accumulation. Customers are leaving or complaining.
Too much WIP. Customer journey is suboptimal.
Rework or delays. No data on customer experience.
Improvement initiatives stalled. Few insights into product usage.
Difficult to prioritize new activities. Sales are down.
It’s quite common to have leadership objectives or even objectives
and key results (OKRs) but to lack clear goals at the team or value stream
level. Maybe there’s been a recent change, and it’s unclear where to focus
or how to proceed. A team might not know or agree on what their
desired outcome (future state) is. In this case, the discovery phase helps
surface the raw information that can be refined into a clear, collective
target outcome. Without this, everyone could be moving in opposite
directions.
In many cases, teams have already been tasked to achieve a particular
outcome and simply need to strategize on how to accomplish that goal.
If everyone feels clear and aligned, you could skip the discovery stage and
move straight to building the Outcome Map as detailed later in this
chapter. But if you’re an outside facilitator or if the group is struggling
with many competing ideas, this discovery process is essential.

-- 93 of 353 --

The discovery stage of Outcome Mapping includes five steps (or
prompts). Participants are asked to list out the following categories:
• context
• goals
• pains
• questions
• ideas
Each of these steps act as a prompt. Participants can share anything
that comes to mind, and there will likely be overlap between the
categories. What one person sees as
context, another person thinks of as
a
question.
Pains and
goals are often two sides of the same coin. The
purpose here is not to get the correct answer into the correct category
but to provide the space for all factors to surface. It’s better to have
things surfaced and placed in multiple categories than not surfaced at all.
By making space for context, ideas, questions, pains, and goals,
discovery provides a venue that encourages participation, warms up the
group with a familiar activity, and demonstrates the value placed on
sharing perspectives. You’ll find step-by-step guidance on conducting
outcome discovery and all of the other mapping activities at the end of
this chapter.
Defining the Target Outcome
Stage two, defining the target outcome, answers the question, “What
outcome do we want to achieve?” It is the first step in crafting the actual
Outcome Map. In many cases, the desired outcome will become clear in
the outcome discovery stage that came previously. In others, the
outcome has been handed to a team from leadership or another source,
in which case they can skip outcome discovery and start here by clearly
defining the target outcome.

-- 94 of 353 --

The importance of clarifying the desired outcome—defining value—
before embarking on any kind of flow improvement can’t be overstated.
Sometimes it’s clear where to focus—one fire may be raging while others
are merely smoldering. But if there’s no emergency, or if there are
multiple influential stakeholders each with distinct priorities, it becomes
much more challenging to identify the most valuable investment.
Importantly, making the desired outcome explicit defines what done
looks like. This helps oppose the destructive tendency to work on many
things but not finish any.
Defining Benefits
Stage three, defining benefits, answers the question, “Why does this
outcome matter?” Typically, not all stakeholders fully understand and
appreciate the benefits of achieving the desired outcome. The outcome
may be tied to corporate strategic goals, which may be too far outside the
daily considerations for many team members to appreciate. For this
reason, involving the group in explicitly thinking through and stating all
the benefits of achieving the target outcome helps ensure that teams
build the necessary associations to be motivated by it.
This stage captures the value of the desired outcome. In other words,
why should the team ignore everything else that they could be doing in
service of this one, focused outcome? The value (benefit) should be
considered from three distinct perspectives:
1. Value for customers.
2. Value for the organization.
3. Value for individual contributors.
These benefits may be obvious to some people, but they’re often not
obvious to everyone involved. It’s always helpful to make the overarching
context clear and explicit. What benefit will arise if this outcome is
achieved? The benefits define the value delivered by achieving the

-- 95 of 353 --

outcome. If you struggle to define the benefits, that’s either an indication
that you should not be working on this or that you haven’t fully
understood the broader context in which you’re working. Putting energy
into clarifying this purpose can help enormously, especially if the
benefits of the project are ever called into question at a later time. A truly
powerful target outcome creates a win-win-win scenario across all three
groups (customers, the organization, and contributors). This drives
alignment and fuels motivation.
This stage also provides a chance to connect the target outcome to
critical goals like OKRs; external factors such as market trends, guiding
principles, and values; or other goals, such as faster feedback. This
anchors the target outcome in the team and makes it tangible and
powerful as a motivation moving forward. Most importantly, it’s an
initial validation that the outcome really matters and is worth pursuing.
Defining Obstacles
Stage four, defining obstacles, answers the question, “What could get in
the way?” If there were no obstacles to achieving our desired goal, we
would already be there. Obstacles range from not having the skills
necessary to achieve an outcome, to facing unknown technical
challenges, to dealing with competitive threats—they are the things
actually or potentially impeding us from reaching our desired future
(target outcome).
Looking at obstacles helps identify pain points and get all of the
team’s fears and challenges out into the open so that the team can form a
strategy to avoid them. It is very important to make these obstacles
explicit early in the process so they can be dealt with consciously by
participants. Some people may hesitate to give voice to doubts and
concerns, but this reduces the group’s ability to anticipate and avert
them. Inviting people to name potential risks provides a safe venue for

-- 96 of 353 --

the cautious, wary, or pessimistic perspectives to provide value and be
heard up front.
After all, a failed initiative is extremely expensive. We can’t afford an
environment in which people don’t have the courage or opportunity to
speak up. Allowing doubts to be expressed ensures that the whole group
is able to think consciously about these concerns. If those concerns do
become a reality, the group has already been primed to acknowledge
them and can address the concern more quickly and comfortably.
Some people may have a positive motivation but have a strong
tendency toward doubt and dissent and are more likely to be skeptical of
any initiative. It’s important to make their concerns explicit so they can
be considered and we can seek mitigations. Psychologist Adam Grant
calls such people “disagreeable givers” and praises their potential
contribution to an organization.7
Defining Next Steps
The final stage, defining next steps, answers the question, “How are we
going to proceed?” Since Flow Engineering centers around flow
improvement, a typical next step from Outcome Mapping is to schedule
a Current State Value Stream Mapping workshop (see Chapter 6) to dig
into the current flow and identify areas for improvement. Next steps
may, however, include setting up investigations, interviews, assessments,
and other actions that help the team answer questions and test ideas to
move forward in their work.
Chapter 9 goes into detail on the Flow Roadmap and the importance
of accountability and single-threaded ownership, but suffice it to say,
unless there’s a clear commitment from someone to tackle a next step
within a particular time frame, work is not likely to get done.

-- 97 of 353 --

CASE STUDY
Getting Safety Wrong at a Rocket Ship Startup
The CEO of a fast-moving startup was eager to improve using Value Stream Mapping. After a
brief exchange of context with a facilitator, they dove right into mapping the value stream.
The goal was to identify waste, accelerate delivery, and improve quality. Perfect use of Value
Stream Mapping, right? Not so fast.
First, having three target outcomes without a clear priority is a recipe for distraction and
scope creep. Second, without a session to engage and gather context from the working
group, the facilitator and CEO failed to share the expectations for the initiative with the
whole group, resulting in a lack of psychological safety. Third, without the added context of
benefits and obstacles provided by an Outcome Map, the purpose of and possible
impediments to the improvements were unclear to the participants.
It wasn’t until the CEO left the room that the other participants revealed an untold story
and had a real conversation about the current state. The contributor perspective? “Our CEO
drives us nuts with late changes and unspoken quality standards, resulting in tons of rework
and anxiety.” The CEO perspective? “Without my nudges and guidance, things drag on
forever and end up wrong.”
The facilitator then pivoted toward mediating a conversation between leadership and
contributors that surfaced challenging but ultimately groundbreaking dialogue across the
company. They’d neglected to do the groundwork of establishing the necessary ingredients
for effective collaboration. To reset and realign, the group stepped back to walk through
outcome discovery and define the outcome, benefits, obstacles, and next steps critical to
making the mapping (and actions to follow) most effective. Externalizing this discussion
onto a shared workspace gave everyone a representation to point at rather than each other,
making it possible to create a future state flow that worked for everyone. Downstream
interventions and interruptions were replaced with upstream definition and guiding
principles.
Part of the work was helping teams find those flow solutions. But before you can get to
solutions, you need to help everyone see the same picture. Flow Engineering can sometimes
look a lot like therapy.
Jumping into Value Stream Mapping won’t work unless you’ve first clarified the outcome
you’re seeking to accomplish—for the customer, the team, and the business. Outcome
Mapping helps everyone get clarity on the most valuable shared target, but it also surfaces
important contexts and conflicts. Facilitators need to be attuned to these competing goals.

-- 98 of 353 --

How to Conduct an Outcome Mapping Session
As we stated at the beginning of this chapter, the first challenge to tackle
in the process of Flow Engineering is to clearly define a desired outcome
and important context impacting it. We do this by building an Outcome
Map, inviting team members to dig into a desired outcome and begin
charting the path to achieving it with open eyes. This section details the
steps to conducting your Outcome Mapping session.
Identify Key Stakeholders
First, it’s important to understand that Flow Engineering mapping
exercises are structured conversations with defined outputs. The basic
foundation is for teams to meet. If teams have the opportunity to meet
in person, that can greatly aid in effective communication, engagement,
and trust-building. But many of our sessions are done remotely with the
aid of digital collaboration tools.
So, who should be involved? It’s critical that the people involved in
executing the workflow are involved in clarifying the vision for how their
own process might be improved. Autonomy is one of the most important
intrinsic motivations according to many studies,8 so the team needs
autonomy in deciding how to evolve their practices. The contributing
team should also include the people who have the situational awareness
to accurately determine where changes can be made. When the map is
their own creation, they understand that they have the power to adjust it
as necessary. At the same time, not everyone on the team needs to be
involved. In any meeting, we should aim to involve the minimum
number of people required to make decisions that will be trusted and
accepted by the rest of the team.
In general, you can maximize context and clarity by involving the
same group in all of these mapping exercises, starting with Outcome
Mapping. Being involved in Outcome Mapping maximizes clarity and

-- 99 of 353 --

engagement for participants; therefore, it’s beneficial to get as many
people as possible to participate. But practically, it can be difficult to
manage an interactive workshop for more than twelve people
(facilitation complexity multiplies as more participants are involved).
If you have fewer than ten people responsible for the initiative, we
recommend you invite everyone to participate. If you have more than
ten people responsible for the initiative, we recommend you choose
representatives from each team and from each functional specialty
across these teams. For example, a lead architect, product manager,
department head, and the head of the testing team may all be good
proxies for their team’s concerns. Excluding any key function or
stakeholder could cause the team to overlook key concerns or risk a lack
of engagement from part of the team.
Time Allocation
The entire mapping session should take about sixty minutes at a brisk
pace. Allocate two hours if this is your first time.
Materials Needed
To complete the Outcome Map (and all the other Flow Engineering
maps), you will need a digital collaboration tool if you are remote or
hybrid, or a physical dry-erase board, paper, sticky notes, and markers if
you are all located in person. We like to use at least five varieties of color-
coded sticky notes, but you can use a combination of colored markers
and notes to categorize items.
How Participation Is Distributed
Everyone should be actively encouraged to participate equally. Ideally,
the facilitator doesn’t contribute directly and instead focuses on
fostering safety and inclusion and encouraging the flow of activity.

-- 100 of 353 --

How Groups Are Configured
One main notetaker builds the Outcome Map on the shared board
(either in a digital collaboration tool or on a physical dry-erase board or
piece of paper). Other contributors discuss to add, remove, or amend
aspects of the shared map.
How the Mapping Board Is Arranged
Start by creating an area on a digital or physical board for the first stage
of Outcome Mapping:
outcome discovery. In this area, delineate space
for the five categories mentioned earlier: context, goals, pains, questions,
ideas. (See Figure 5.4 for reference.) If your team has already identified
their target outcome (e.g., it has been handed to you from leadership),
you can abbreviate this stage. Clarifying outcomes is almost always
necessary.
FIGURE 5.4: Five Categories for Outcome Mapping
The five categories or prompts are context, goals, pains, questions, and ideas.
Next, create a second area on your board for the Outcome Map. This
map consists of four columns: outcome, benefits, obstacles, and next
steps.

-- 101 of 353 --

FIGURE 5.5: Stages of Outcome Mapping
Be sure to leave plenty of blank space on the board. There will be
several opportunities to use the blank spaces throughout the exercises.
The Outcome Mapping Process (Step by Step)
1. OUTCOME DISCOVERY
As a reminder, the first stage, outcome discovery, answers the question,
“What is our target?” In this pre-mapping stage, the team surfaces a
variety of possible target outcomes. As we outlined earlier, this could be
anything that is causing dissatisfaction or misalignment on a team. This
stage can be helpful when there are competing or unclear priorities.
However, if the team already has a clearly understood outcome, they can
skip this stage.
To conduct the discovery stage, first place blank sticky notes in the
designated discovery area of the board. There should be a selection of
colors (at least five), with each color assigned to a column category (e.g.,
context = yellow, goals = green, etc.). Start by having participants work
independently, filling the blank sticky notes with their context, goals,
pains, questions, and ideas. Remember, each of these five categories is
meant to act like a prompt. Participants should include anything that
comes to mind, and there may be overlap between the categories. Unlike
in a board game, the rules here don’t penalize. The purpose is simply to
provide space to surface everyone’s thoughts. (5 mins.)

-- 102 of 353 --

Next, place each of these sticky notes in the appropriate category
column in the discovery stage on the board. (See Figure 5.6.)
FIGURE 5.6: Example of the Discovery Stage of Outcome Mapping
Discovery stage acts to surface the wide variety of active concerns for a group.
As a team, review the sticky notes. You will notice that many are
related to the same few themes. For instance, you may find a sticky for
“How do we prioritize?” in both
pains and
goals. This is fine. Often pains
and goals are two sides of the same coin. You may also see there are
multiple stickies in different categories that deal with past work or tech
debt. Don’t worry. This is by design. Some participants will think more in
terms of questions, some in ideas, and some in pains. The discovery stage
of the Outcome Map allows everyone to realize organically that they may
in fact be on the same page (or, as we mentioned in Part 1, looking at the
same challenge from different perspectives).
Encourage the team to identify perspectives and then present their
understanding of the topics and themes that are appearing. The more
they’re driving the process, the more the result will reflect their collective
understanding. (5 mins.)

-- 103 of 353 --

Next, on a blank area of the board, group the notes into the themes
or topics that start to surface. These groupings of themes may contain a
mix of goals, pains, etc. (3 mins.) (See Figure 5.7.)
FIGURE 5.7: Notes Organized into Themes
Color coding allows us to group themes while retaining the original item type.
Now, the team should vote on which group of topics (or theme) they
think is the most important to work on right now. The team should
decide how they would like to define “most important.” Digital
collaboration tools usually offer voting as a built-in capability to assist
with this.
As shown in Figure 5.8, if you’re working on a physical board or
paper, you can vote by putting dots on the corner of the sticky notes
with a marker. (TIP: When multiple items have been clustered together,
the team votes can be collected on the upper-rightmost sticky note or
the group title as a representative of that cluster.)

-- 104 of 353 --

FIGURE 5.8: Example of Voting Using Dots
Voting allows the group to narrow the focus and align on a single theme to pursue.
Based on the grouping or theme that receives the most votes, work
with the team to craft a target outcome that captures the information
from the sticky notes and represents a valuable target. Remember to
craft your outcome with the following in mind:
1. Value for customers.
2. Value for the organization.
3. Value for individual contributors.
For example, if the team selected the group in Figure 5.8 titled
“Migration Initiative” and incorporated all the notes within that group,
they may come up with a target outcome like this: “Eighty percent of
critical legacy apps migrated to next-generation cloud by Q3.” It’s also
fine to have a primary and secondary outcome—for example, “Increase
throughput by 30%” balanced against “Maintain NPS.” This can prevent
overinvestment in the target outcome to the detriment of a critical
metric.
Outcomes can be simple and concise, such as “Reduce production
defects by 50%,” or specific and exhaustive. In one workshop with a large
engineering organization, the outcome started as, “We deliver a self-

-- 105 of 353 --

service internal development experience that makes it easy to learn and
succeed, enjoyable to work, hard to do the wrong thing,” which seemed
broad and lacked measurability. After a brief discussion, we distilled it
down to “eNPS (employee Net Promoter Score) up by twenty points and
production defects down 20%.” Less aspirational but more measurable.
The guidance for SMART goals can also be helpful in thinking about
crafting a bulletproof target outcome. A SMART goal is Specific,
Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Time-Bound.
For our purposes, you can think of outcomes and goals as nearly
interchangeable, so don’t worry about the nuance between them. In
short, goals tend to be aspirational, and an outcome is the result or
consequence of actions taken. We define effective action as action
leading to a desired outcome.
Now that the team has selected the target outcome to focus on, it’s
time to build the Outcome Map to chart a path to achieving that
outcome.
2. THE OUTCOME MAP: DEFINING THE TARGET OUTCOME
Once the team has identified the target outcome (either by starting with
a defined outcome or crafting it together in the outcome discovery
stage), they will build the Outcome Map around that target. The team
should start by placing this target outcome on a sticky and putting it in
the column labeled “Outcome.”
3. DEFINING BENEFITS, OBSTACLES, AND NEXT STEPS
Next, the team will work through each of the remaining three columns
one by one.
For each column, follow these steps:
• Step 1: Participants should reflect silently on the column prompt
(e.g., benefits, obstacles, or next steps) to generate ideas. For

-- 106 of 353 --

instance, if they are working on the “Benefits” column, participants
would start reflecting on what benefits the target outcome will
bring to the team and organization. (1 min.)
• Step 2: Break the group into pairs. Each person in the pair should
share their ideas on the column prompt generated during self-
reflection. (2 mins.)
• Step 3: Each pair joins another pair to form groups of four. Each
foursome shares and consolidates their ideas for the specific
column. (TIP: Look for similarities and differences.) (4 mins.)
• Step 4: Next, the entire group votes on which items are highest
priority and moves those ideas to the top of the column. (2 mins.)
The group repeats this sequence for all three columns, defining the
benefits of achieving the target outcome, identifying the obstacles, and,
finally, listing the next steps to achieving the outcome. (In total, working
through all three columns should take around thirty minutes.) The
reason for the iteration, collaboration, and consolidation here is to
include and unleash everyone while avoiding simple issues like having a
misspelled or vague item miss out on votes. A completed Outcome Map
is shown in Figure 5.9.

-- 107 of 353 --

FIGURE 5.9: A Completed Outcome Map
By the end of the mapping exercise, ask the group if any of the
following questions are unanswered or unclear:
• What is our target outcome?
• What are the benefits of achieving the outcome?
• What obstacles stand between us and the outcome?
• What are our next steps toward achieving the outcome?
If there’s still uncertainty, work through it before moving on!
Tips and Traps
• Avoid allowing a few people to dominate the session.
• If the facilitator is not responsible for delivering the outcome, they
should not contribute ideas to the board.

-- 108 of 353 --

• If mapping remotely, perform the exercise with participants’ video
turned on to improve engagement.
• Limit the scope of the session to goals and actions within this
group’s ability to influence.
• Share guidance on creating high-quality target outcomes, such as
SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-
Bound).
• If the outcome relates to flow improvement, Value Stream Mapping
will help participants target specific parts of their workflow to
improve.
• Implicit in the three-to-six-month time horizon for the target
outcome is the idea that this effort be repeated as the target is
achieved or the landscape and priorities change.
• If your outcome includes performance improvement, make sure
one of your next steps includes establishing a baseline for
measurement so that comparison can be made.
Riffs and Variations
• Expanded Outcome Maps could include additional columns like
measures,	
ownership, and	
methods, depending on the time
available and the desire for expanded scope and clarity. Where
more detail and definition is necessary or desired, Outcome
Mapping can accommodate it.
• In complex scenarios, it may be impossible to predict specific
outcomes and may be more beneficial to frame outcomes as
increased learning, reduced risk, or more options (e.g., place three
bets to reduce financial exposure to unpredictable market and
regulatory conditions). Next steps in complex scenarios may be
running experiments, holding further discussions, or soliciting
feedback from a broader population.

-- 109 of 353 --

• Outcome Mapping can be performed repeatedly over the life of an
initiative to periodically reestablish clarity.
• Impact mapping is similar to Outcome Mapping but focuses on
external personas and a separate outcome for each. Outcome
Mapping substitutes personas for benefits across multiple
stakeholders without naming them specifically up front. If you have
more time, you can craft your Outcome Map to branch and
interconnect the same way an impact map breaks out each stage
into direct contributions.
BOLT GLOBAL
Software Delivery Team
To illustrate how the Outcome Mapping process works, we’ll look at the example of Bolt
Global’s software delivery team that we first looked at in the Introduction. Like many teams,
Bolt Global is seeking to improve their software delivery performance. Knowing that the
team needed to clarify their challenges and main goal, Sharon gathered key stakeholders to
meet and share thoughts, ideas, concerns, and questions so they could act quickly,
collaboratively, and effectively. Figure 5.10 summarizes the challenges that Sharon and her
team are facing.
FIGURE 5.10: The Challenge Landscape within Sharon’s Area of Responsibility

-- 110 of 353 --

Sharon organized an Outcome Mapping workshop for her team to clarify their context
and narrow their focus. Initially, the relationship between the diverse challenges they were
facing was unclear. Issues would arise from time to time but were not made explicit to the
whole group. Outcome Mapping gave the team a chance to make these concerns visible for
consideration by the whole group. Figure 5.11 shows that the discovery stage of this session
resulted in the team working through their known context and challenges to focus their
efforts on releasing twice as often.
FIGURE 5.11: The Bolt Global Outcome Mapping Process
The Bolt Global team agreed with the need to increase delivery speed. But discussion
surfaced a critical doubt for participants: that speeding up would compromise quality.

-- 111 of 353 --

Improving quality received the second-highest number of votes. It was clear to the team
that they needed to focus on faster delivery but keep quality in mind at every step to ensure
it was increased and not compromised.
The other concerns raised in the discussion were significant. Empowering members of
the group to make their concerns explicit allowed them to feel their voices were heard. The
anonymous voting on ideas also allowed the team to express or withhold support for ideas
without risk. Seeing the results of voting together allowed the team to understand what
otherwise would have been hidden: the views and motivations of others on the team.
In short, this exercise made visible what was invisible and enabled individuals to align on
value as a group. Social interactions involve risk, and some people are more sensitive to that
than others. Teams need the best ideas to be surfaced, and they need confidence that
others on the team will not be hostile or belittling to any ideas that are surfaced. Serious
risks to a project sometimes appear as small doubts. And the most brilliant and innovative
ideas can sometimes appear far-fetched at first. Teams need to be able to amplify these
weak signals if they want to capture the biggest innovations and avert the most serious
risks. Moreover, activities such as these engage the whole team in the creative process,
which can be deeply fulfilling and enjoyable for those involved. This builds a bond between
members of the team and typically also with the broader enterprise.
The Bolt Global team now turns to Outcome Mapping to dig into the desired outcome of
doubling delivery speed.

-- 112 of 353 --

Engaging with a Mandated Outcome
Target initiatives for a team are sometimes the result of thought or discussion at
higher levels of the organization. The team tasked with responsibility for those
outcomes may lack information or perspective on why those outcomes were chosen.
So it’s important to be humble and respectful of these organizational initiatives and
give leaders the benefit of the doubt that the initiative is important and beneficial.
But it’s normal that leaders higher in the organization may lack detailed
understanding of what’s necessary to achieve an outcome and may not have imagined
other side effects of the initiative. The first stage of Outcome Mapping is to critically
assess the intended outcome and to surface fundamental doubts and questions from
the beginning.
Teams often don’t feel they have autonomy to define or redefine the outcomes
they’ve been tasked to achieve. The default operating model for most organizations is
still a command-and-control model where people higher in the organization dictate
both the outcomes they want their teams to achieve and the methods they should
follow. In simple situations, that approach is adequate. But that approach deprives
teams of a sense of autonomy, which undermines their instinctive motivation and
creative capacity, as explained in Chapter 1. In complex environments, motivation and
creativity are essential for success. When teams take ownership of the outcome, they
can navigate any trade-offs while staying within the bounds defined by leadership.
In most cases, teams can subtly reframe an outcome in their own words while still
keeping within the parameters set by leaders. Defining and reframing the benefits of
the outcome can ensure that an outcome that seemed to only serve one group
resonates with everyone. The process of Outcome Mapping is a powerful way of
bringing the mission of a team to life because it encourages the team to think about
and clarify the motivations and implications behind a target outcome.
It can happen that even after this process and discussion, the outcome doesn’t
make sense to the team, or they anticipate so many obstacles or side effects that the
initiative doesn’t seem likely to bring benefit. Such skepticism or even cynicism about
organizational initiatives is common in larger organizations, and teams often find
themselves trudging onward with little genuine motivation. Outcome Mapping can
give teams the clarity to express their concerns in a more compelling way to
leadership or to propose alternative ways to achieve a goal. This can save significant
money, time, and morale by addressing in the short term what could be disastrous in

-- 113 of 353 --

the long term. Doubts and frustrations that are not articulated cannot be dealt with
consciously but may manifest as resistance to change.
Leaders in some organizations may be particularly resistant to feedback from their
teams. To maximize chances of success, proposed adjustments to a plan should be
framed in a way that better enables the target outcome, rather than in a way that
implies serious flaws in their thinking. Supported by an Outcome Map, the discussion
becomes an invitation to clarify the map rather than present a flaw in logic or strategy.
Diplomacy is pragmatic, but it’s also respectful.
If the team can’t envision a way to tactfully deliver feedback to leadership, the
normal response is to grudgingly proceed with the activities. But when the team
anticipates that an initiative will fail or bring no benefit, motivation and effort
evaporate. If the plan fails, in their minds they can say, “I knew it would fail,” and gripe
privately to coworkers. Such a situation, while common, reflects a failure to engage
the creativity, intelligence, and resilience of the team. We should do everything in our
power to ensure everyone is clear and engaged on the mission and to figure out how
to skillfully inform management of any concerns before beginning.
Conclusion
Outcome Mapping provides a fast framework for helping teams identify
value, build initial clarity, and internalize the benefits of an initiative.
The process is creative and iterative to allow the team to build and share
insights together and to surface doubts and limitations that might derail
the team if not acknowledged.
Outcome Mapping focuses on unifying around a valuable purpose
from the beginning and is an important prerequisite for later mapping
exercises. It should be repeated periodically to allow teams to adjust to
changed circumstances and target new opportunities.

-- 114 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Beginning with the end in mind provides clarity that helps teams highlight where
and how to make improvements.
• The mapping is more important than the map because it provides a framework for
productive and creative discussion that allows ideas to evolve.
• Doing each step collaboratively exposes and allows for resolution of hidden doubts
and confusion.
• By cocreating a clear, visual asset that maps the path, Outcome Mapping helps to
bridge the gap between teams, individuals, and areas of concern.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 115 of 353 --

CHAPTER 6
Current State Value Stream Mapping
“The reason Value Stream Mapping is so effective is
that it focuses attention on products and their value to
customers rather than on organizations, assets,
technologies, processes, and career paths.”
MARY & TOM POPPENDIECK
FLOW ENGINEERING IS A LIGHTWEIGHT method for teams to improve flow
throughout their ways of working. At the heart of this method is
understanding the team’s real goals, looking at how they currently work
together, and then ideating on possible flow improvements. Our second
type of mapping, Current State Value Stream Mapping, helps teams find
this clarity (see Figure 6.1).
FIGURE 6.1: Value Stream Mapping Primarily Serves to Build Clarity

-- 116 of 353 --

After decades of use in traditional manufacturing and knowledge
work, Value Stream Mapping is more popular than ever as a way to
visualize and gather actionable metrics on a team’s workflow.
In the previous chapter, we learned how to use Outcome Mapping to
discern value and answer important questions that build clarity and help
focus our work. This chapter begins with a quick overview of what Value
Stream Mapping is. We then take a look at the power of Value Stream
Mapping to improve a team’s understanding of how they work today and
how their work could be reimagined. We discuss how to prepare for a
Value Stream Mapping session, including who to involve, how often to
do the exercise, and what you need in advance. We then explain how to
actually conduct a Value Stream Mapping session, visualizing and
measuring the current state of a team’s workflow.
Where’s the Stream?
John Shook and Mike Rother captured a key definition of value streams in the book
Learning to See: “Value shall be specified from the standpoint of the customer. A value
stream shall be identified for each product or service family—from concept to launch
and from order to delivery.”1 In other words, everywhere you have a product or service,
you have a value stream to create and deliver it.
It can seem impossible to map a value stream if you’re unclear on where it is and
what it looks like before starting, but that’s what mapping helps us do. The key points
to keep in mind is that the stream already exists and the flow is already present.
Knowing that, we can recall past actions to see the sequence of activities leading to a
customer outcome. This will reveal the stream along with its performance. It helps to
have a few guiding principles to “see” value streams as a model before you step into
mapping. Here are a few important ones:2
• A value stream is just a pattern. Where this pattern appears, you can apply a
consistent set of practices.
• Where there is a customer, there is a value stream. The customer can be either
internal to the business (as a stakeholder) or external.

-- 117 of 353 --

• Every organization contains a network of value streams serving customers. No
stream is independent. You have streams connecting directly to external
customer outcomes and streams supporting those with internal stakeholder
outcomes.
• Working backward is easier than forward. From a given customer outcome, you
can discover the stream by asking, “What happened to deliver that?” until you
get to the inception.
• Work backward from a specific customer outcome. Customers can be customers
for many reasons and get value in many ways. To find the right stream, identify a
specific outcome (e.g., an enterprise user using our latest feature or an internal
developer deploying their own infrastructure). That way you can focus on the one
stream of work that made it happen.
• Value streams can exist inside a mess. One person may have many
responsibilities, each of which contributes to different value streams. There may
be enormous variation and long delays between stages, which can confound
attempts to identify value streams precisely. Part of Flow Engineering’s goal is to
address this mess and work to create more standard and simplified work.
What Is Value Stream Mapping?
The practice of mapping the flow of work originated more than a
century ago and owes much to Frank Gilbreth’s work on process charts
published in 1921.3 The practice of Value Stream Mapping was explicitly
defined in the book
Learning to See by John Shook and Mike Rother as a
“tool that helps you to see and understand the flow of material and
information as a product makes its way through the value stream.”4
Value Stream Mapping identifies the processes involved in the work, as
well as metrics on speed, quality, waste, and load at each step of the value
stream and for the entire flow.

-- 118 of 353 --

Paula Thrasher laid out a useful framework in her 2020 DevOps Enterprise Summit
talk “Interactive Virtual Value Stream Mapping - Visualizing Flow in a Virtual World.”
She laid out 5 Rs to identify value streams, starting from a delivered feature or change:
choose something recent, real, reach, representative, and road tested.5
• Recent: Something in the recent past that you can remember.
• Real: Something that actually has business impact and not merely a software
upgrade.
• Reach: Something that traversed the full value stream.
• Representative: Something typical of how you do work and not an emergency
request.
• Road tested: Something that is in production, ideally with telemetry and
customer feedback.
As we stated earlier, a value stream is just a pattern. Where this
pattern appears, you can apply a consistent set of practices. Your
organization is a collection of value streams; they’re just not visible
without mapping. Everything from hiring, customer onboarding, and
support to roadmap definition, mergers and acquisitions, and quarterly
planning can be treated as a value stream with either an internal or
external customer. That means we can map, measure, and improve flow
in all of these areas and more.
We identify a value stream by identifying the customer and working
backward by asking, “What do we do that allows a customer to receive
value?” Then we ask, “What do we do before that?” and so on, until we
reach the inception of the workflow. Identifying and getting clarity on
the value streams that make up your company reveals the invisible
network of relationships and activities that actually drive your business.
Value Stream Mapping is the second of five principles of Lean
introduced by James P. Womack and Daniel T. Jones in
Lean Thinking.

-- 119 of 353 --

The first of these five principles states, “precisely specify value by
product.”6
As Don Reinertsen says in
Principles of Product Development Flow,
“The value added by an activity is the difference in the price that an
economically rational buyer would pay for a work product before, and
after, the activity is performed.”7 With Value Stream Mapping, we can
collectively build clarity on how value is created in a process so that
information can be used to reduce waste.
As shown in Figure 6.2, there are five stages to Value Stream
Mapping:
1. Stream selection
2. Add activities
3. Add timing
4. Add dimensions
5. Highlight constraint
FIGURE 6.2: The Five Stages of Value Stream Mapping
Through these stages, we gain a clear understanding of the workflow
most relevant to the target outcome and where to focus for the greatest
improvement.

-- 120 of 353 --

Teams and individuals often operate within a narrow segment of a
value stream. This makes it hard for those contributors to grasp how
their work enables or constrains other groups that depend on them. This
leads to narrow attempts at improvement that fail to improve the whole
system. Any value stream will have a single, rate-limiting step that
constrains the overall flow of value delivered, but there are often several
low-effort/high-impact opportunities to discover upon mapping.
Value Stream Mapping is a collaborative visualization exercise that
reveals this constraint along with other impactful improvement
opportunities. This exercise pairs visualization with performance
measurement using qualitative and quantitative data. The resulting
Value Stream Map serves as a shared visual representation of the work
process that is a focal point for team discussions around performance
improvement. This rapid version of Value Stream Mapping serves as a
quick and easy on-ramp for more detailed and comprehensive maps as
buy-in increases. Map quickly; show promise; go further.
For Value Stream Mapping to be effective, the team needs to be
aligned on their objectives and aspirations. The purpose of Outcome
Mapping (see the previous chapter) is to get a sense of where we are
headed, whether we are all in agreement, the challenges and obstacles
that could get in our way, what we still need to learn, and what success
will look like. The goal with Value Stream Mapping is to create a
visualization, supported by data, that reveals very specific improvement
opportunities.
Combined with information gained from Dependency Mapping (see
Chapter 7), Value Stream Mapping allows us to make accurate
investment hypotheses based on data. This may be framed as cost
savings, revenue increases, employee satisfaction, or customer
satisfaction, among other positive outcomes. The most important aspect
is measuring the timing of both the working phases and the waiting
phases between handoffs, as shown in Figure 6.3. Time is the one thing

-- 121 of 353 --

we can’t scale and the easiest thing for us to waste. It’s also quite factual.
Looking backward at a flow of work, we see the clock was ticking the
entire time. Everything else is far more subjective, so if we can’t capture
at least the timing, it will likely be too difficult to agree on anything else
we could measure.
FIGURE 6.3: Simplified Value Stream Map
The format of a simplified Value Stream Map, highlighting the key measurements
of cycle time and wait time.
Value Stream Mapping balances qualitative information about the
complete business workflow with a layer of quantitative information
about performance and effectiveness. A Value Stream Map frames data
from the point of view of contributors in the context of their customers
and layers this data over an illustration of flow to make it easy for people
inside or outside of an organization to understand a process.

-- 122 of 353 --

Value Streams vs. Customer Journey
Customer Journey Maps depict a customer’s journey from the moment that they
identify a need through the moment they take interest in, purchase, use, and
recommend a product or service. The Customer Journey Map is framed from the
customer’s point of view and represents their internal experience.8
Mapping the customer journey is a way for marketing, sales, product management,
user experience, and business strategists to visualize and reason about the
customer’s experience at each stage of their interaction. Developing a sense of the
customers’ journey allows organizations to ease the path to providing what customers
need.
Value Stream Maps also focus on the customer’s experience of value. But unlike
Customer Journey Maps, Value Stream Maps provide a behind-the-scenes look at the
work that goes into delivering any valuable aspect of that journey. While the Customer
Journey Map traces the customer’s external experience with a product, Value Stream
Maps depict the internal flow that makes the product possible. Table 6.1 (see page 84)
highlights the differences between these two kinds of maps.
TABLE 6.1: Differences between Customer Journey Maps and Value Stream Maps
Aspect Customer Journey Map Value Stream Map
Perspective External (from the customer’s
viewpoint).
Internal (from the organization’s
and stakeholder’s viewpoints).
Definition The series of interactions or
steps a customer goes through
when interacting with a product
or service.
The sequence of activities required
to design, produce, and deliver a
product or service to a customer,
capturing both work and
information flows.
Primary
Focus
Understanding and improving
the customer’s experience and
relationship with a brand.
Identifying and eliminating waste
in processes to improve overall
efficiency.
Goal Enhance customer satisfaction,
loyalty, and overall experience.
Increase process efficiency, reduce
waste, and improve delivery or

-- 123 of 353 --

production flow.
Components Touch points, emotions,
channels, pain points, and
stages like awareness,
consideration, purchase,
retention, and advocacy.
Processes, flow of work and
information, cycle times, queues,
value-adding and non–value-
adding activities.
Key Metrics Customer satisfaction, Net
Promoter Score (NPS), churn
rate, Customer Effort Score
(CES).
Lead time, cycle time, work-in-
process, throughput, quality,
value-added ratio. (See appendix
for details.)
Many organizations are familiar with describing and working to improve the
customer journey. But organizations (especially knowledge work organizations) are
typically less familiar with the principles of designing workflows that are central to
value stream performance.
As detailed in Figure 6.4 (see page 85), the customer journey is enabled by the
value streams supporting it. The value streams of the organization provide the value
that motivates and fulfills the customer journey. This interconnection of streams with
each other and the customer journey forms the network of value streams we’ll discuss
further in Part 3.
FIGURE 6.4: Customer Journey vs. Value Stream
Every part of the customer journey is fed by different value streams in an
organization.

-- 124 of 353 --

Customer journeys are
the reason your business is in business, and value streams
are
how your business is in business. By looking at the customer journey, we can work
backward from customer outcomes to the stream of work that enables those
outcomes. Every value stream either directly enables a customer journey or supports
another value stream that is. If you’re familiar with your customer’s journey, you’re
well on your way to understanding your organization in terms of flow and mapping
your path to better customer outcomes.
The traditional way of representing a Value Stream Map is shown in
Figure 6.5 (see page 86). It is divided into three sections:
1. Information flows
2. Material flows
3. Lead time ladder

-- 125 of 353 --

FIGURE 6.5: The Traditional Form of Representing a Value Stream Map for Manufacturing
Source: Image adapted from Daniel Penfield, “Value Stream Map Parts,” Wikimedia
Commons, accessed November 2023, under Creative Commons Attribution-Share
Alike 3.0 Unported license.
This diagram originated from the material and information flow
diagrams used in the Toyota Production System. The information flow
section may include detailed depictions of all the databases that track a
production system, but it often simply depicts the most basic piece of
information in a production process: a customer placing an order with a
supplier.
The material flow aspect of the Value Stream Map depicts the
production process. Knowledge work doesn’t primarily deal with
material objects, so the designation “material flow” is absent from most

-- 126 of 353 --

diagrams. Nevertheless, this is the heart of the diagram—the
representation of the sequence of processes that move from raw
materials (which in software development is typically just an idea) to a
finished product (working software). Each process in this section can be
annotated with relevant metrics, especially about load (items currently
being processed in this step), time (cycle time + wait time), and quality
(often the percentage of work completed successfully at this step).
The final section of the diagram, the lead time ladder, provides a
visual indication of the most important metric in the process: time. Time
is the only truly nonrenewable resource. Time is the main resource
consumed by knowledge workers as they contemplate, discuss, write,
and so on. And time is the main thing a customer perceives to be
standing between making their request and having it fulfilled. Time is
also the main place where inefficiencies hide, especially in the waiting
period between steps.
The Value Stream Map emphasized in Flow Engineering is
significantly simpler than this traditional diagram (Figure 6.5) but still
gives special deference to tracking time.
There have been many excellent books written about applying
traditional Value Stream Mapping to digital work, beginning with Mary
and Tom Poppendieck’s	
Lean Software Development and continuing
with Karen Martin and Mike Osterling’s	
Value Stream Mapping and
quite recently with Gary Rupp’s encyclopedic
Driving DevOps with Value
Stream Management. Our goal with Flow Engineering is to build on the
traditional practice by incorporating the simplest possible version of
Value Stream Mapping to help teams get started and address the on-
ramp gap (as explained earlier).
In our experience, Value Stream Mapping is widely espoused but not
frequently practiced. There are many highly disciplined software
engineering teams relying on sophisticated performance improvement
processes. But for every sophisticated team, there are ten more teams

-- 127 of 353 --

that are floundering and struggling even to clearly understand their
corporate goals, let alone to optimize their process.
With Flow Engineering we rely on a very simple version of a Value
Stream Map that anyone can easily understand and create, as shown in
Figure 6.6. For teams that are not yet familiar with Value Stream Maps,
it’s important to start with such a simple and lightweight approach. This
is faster, and thus less expensive, to create, and it is also simpler to
understand for the uninitiated. As you build familiarity, the other texts
mentioned above can help you layer on more advanced techniques.
FIGURE 6.6: A Simple Flow Engineering Value Stream Map
The most basic representation of a value stream begins with
visualizing the sequence of activities involved in producing and
delivering value to a customer. We then add metrics of cycle time
(process time) and wait time to the visualization to complete the Value
Stream Map, as seen in Figure 6.6. Often just that level of detail is

-- 128 of 353 --

sufficient to inform improvement efforts, but we can go well beyond the
basics as needs or opportunities arise.
As the team discusses and investigates the Value Stream Map, it’s
natural to start annotating it with additional information as relevant. If
there’s a large backlog at one step, we may note the number of items in
the backlog. If items are typically sent back from one step to a previous
step, we may annotate this also. (See again Figure 6.6.) But those metrics
are added in a just-in-time fashion as investigations indicate the need.
This allows for an initial version of the map to be completed quickly and
for the team to prioritize gathering data on the areas of most pressing
need rather than aiming for complete data on every step.
One of the most valuable parts of this minimal Value Stream Map is
that it doesn’t take a massive investment of time from the team involved
(especially if it’s facilitated professionally). It’s hard to convince a team
that you’re focused on eliminating waste and improving flow when the
team has to stop what they’re doing for a week!
CASE STUDY
Sprint-Level Current State Value Stream Mapping
A client was struggling to keep up with the demand for small updates from their users. They
did an Outcome Mapping exercise that helped them settle on the goal of moving from
monthly releases to biweekly releases. They then undertook a Value Stream Mapping
exercise to clarify how their process could be improved to support this goal.
They began by reiterating the desired outcome in the top left corner of the map (see
Figure 6.7): “Get to two-week releases.” Stating the goal up front and keeping it visual
focuses the team’s efforts, making sure they don’t get distracted trying to chase things that
won’t serve the goal. Similar to stating the agenda for a meeting, this saves time and effort
and keeps people on the same page.

-- 129 of 353 --

FIGURE 6.7: Example of a Completed Value Stream Map
The value stream map is typically laid out in one horizontal flow. We have broken it
here to better fit the page. Parallel steps are represented inside the dotted line
box.
Since the team was working in four-week sprints, doubling the release frequency implied
condensing all of the sprint activities into a two-week period. They started by enumerating

-- 130 of 353 --

the processes that happen in these sprints to determine how the process might be
condensed. The goal in making this explicit is to identify activities that might be wasting
time, duplicating efforts, or incurring penalties. For example, if sprint planning currently
takes 1.5 hours every four weeks, will it be efficient for the team to do that twice as often?
The team listed all the serial and parallel processes, the time these processes took, and
the wait time between each step. They then added up the total time as well as subsets of the
process that looked concerning so they could identify a constraint. The bottom right-hand
corner of Figure 6.7 shows those summary metrics in pink.
The total process currently takes twenty-seven days (the lead time). That clearly won’t fit
into a two-week sprint. Of that, eighteen days is cycle time, while nine days is wait time.
(Note that the pull request [PR] process is listed as taking five days, which presumably
implies additional hidden wait time.)
Reducing wait time (one-third of the total time) is a big opportunity. The team was also
concerned about how long it took to begin initial work and how much time was required to
review and test completed work. It takes 3.5 days just to get started on work after an
important improvement has been identified (which slows the team’s ability to start
building) and a total of sixteen days for testing (almost double the amount of time spent
actually building). It’s not uncommon in many organizations to spend more time testing and
validating than building. Within this test and validation time, there are typically many hidden
delays.
This big picture analysis helped the team identify three main hot spots, outlined in red in
Figure 6.7. The first concern was the initial delay from the time a work item is identified to
when the team actually starts development. The second concern was the peer review (PR)
and quality assurance (QA) process, which together are the longest steps in the process. The
third concern was the five-day waiting period after user acceptance testing (UAT) and
before deployment to production and sprint review.
Why It Works: Gaining Perspective to Build Clarity
Committing to something where you may not directly feel or even
witness the benefit is a stretch. It’s a hard ask from people because it’s
often intangible and something people haven’t done before. It’s hard to
trust that it’s going to pay off. Value Stream Mapping certainly doesn’t
sell itself from that perspective. But the power of a collaborative

-- 131 of 353 --

mapping exercise is that everyone can be engaged. Contrast this with
deadly boring meetings with zero engagement.
There are many reasons Value Stream Mapping is so powerful, but
here are a few key points.
Perspective
Stepping back allows us to see the perspectives of others. Collaborating
to create a Value Stream Map fosters a sense of empathy with unfamiliar
roles and domains. It instills a sense that the team workflow is a system
that can be developed. This invites creativity and optimization ideas to
come from multiple people within the team. And this allows the team to
build shared vision and goals and inspire creativity by designing a future
state.
Systems Thinking and Visibility
Systems thinking and visibility help us see the whole picture so we can
understand what to change. Value Stream Mapping promotes systems
thinking because it provides a comprehensive view of the entire process
or system rather than focusing on isolated parts. This holistic approach
allows organizations to identify and understand the interconnections
and dependencies within their workflows, enabling them to pinpoint
inefficiencies and bottlenecks more effectively.
By mapping the entire value stream, from initial input to final
output, organizations can see how individual components interact and
impact the overall system. This insight facilitates more informed
decision-making, aligns efforts with organizational goals, and promotes a
deeper understanding of how changes in one area can affect others,
leading to more effective and sustainable improvements. This exercise is
often the first time that teams have visualized or measured the end-to-
end process for delivering software. Typically one or more parts of the
value stream consume a disproportionate amount of the total lead time.

-- 132 of 353 --

Performance Measurement
As is often said, “What gets measured gets managed.” Value Stream
Mapping is a powerful tool for enabling data-driven decision-making
about workflow improvements. A Value Stream Map can convert the
vague and unknown into concrete, quantifiable insights into a team’s
processes, allowing them to base decisions on solid evidence rather than
assumptions or intuition.
This data-centric approach also facilitates identifying specific areas
for improvement, understanding the impact of potential changes, and
tracking the effectiveness of implemented solutions. Measurement is
crucial to separate facts from opinions and to bring everyone to the same
quantifiable understanding.
Identification of Constraints
As the famous saying goes, “The constraint is the way.” Eliyahu M.
Goldratt’s Theory of Constraints aims to prevent a common mistake
seen in collaborative work and especially in knowledge work. It’s easy to
invest substantial time, money, and effort on improvement efforts that
have little actual impact on customers. We can even have a negative
impact if we work without the entire system flow in mind.
DevOps rose to prominence as a remedy to the problem caused in
downstream operations due to the increased pace of Agile Software
Development. Removing the constraint in operations was the key to
unlocking the throughput of Agile development efforts upstream. Value
Stream Mapping allows us to see that dynamic and reveal the flow
constraint, which is where our efforts will have maximum impact.
Revealing Hidden Opportunities
Opportunities often lie hidden by daily work. Understanding how
context of individual work affects customer satisfaction enhances
employee engagement and motivation, as it makes the impact of their

-- 133 of 353 --

efforts more visible. This perspective is especially crucial as the toil of
daily tasks tends to crowd out the overarching objectives and the next
steps toward these goals.
Our consistent experience is that simply cocreating a Current State
Value Stream Map reveals issues that allow teams to get at least 20% of
their time back immediately. Common insights include seeing that there
are two processes that can be done in parallel or that a meeting that isn’t
delivering much value could be replaced by an email. These low-hanging
fruits ensure that Value Stream Mapping exercises more than pay for
themselves. Twenty percent time reduction is equivalent to one day a
week. How much is that worth to an organization?
Optimizing productivity by minimizing wasted time and effort
increases the value gained from the talent and energy we have available.
A Value Stream Map can capture information about wasted effort,
cognitive load, collaboration issues, quality gaps, or anything else you
want to layer onto the basic structure of steps and timing. Let’s take a
moment to explore what Value Stream Mapping often looks like in a
real-world situation.
BOLT GLOBAL
Continued
To understand how to improve the throughput of their product development life cycle,
Sharon gathered her team as well as key contributors upstream and downstream to map
their current workflow.
They started by pasting the target outcome, “Release twice as often,” from their
Outcome Mapping session onto the top right corner of their canvas. Sharon wanted to make
sure this outcome remained the focus of their mapping efforts and make it easy to refer
back to.
Next, Sharon and the group laid out all the activities involved in contributing to their
delivery of value, working backward from the delivery of their last release. After laying out

-- 134 of 353 --

each activity step, they layered on measurement of each activity’s cycle time and the wait
time between.
The team discovered a number of clear opportunities just from reviewing the timing
measurement. Given this was her first time with Value Stream Mapping, Sharon decided
against layering on additional information like quality, roles, value-added time, etc. until
she’d been able to show some results and gain further buy-in.
As shown in Figure 6.8 (see page 94), in a simplified example of their value stream, they
noticed that the environment setup step takes 45% of the total time in the value stream. If
they tackle this constraint, they could be most of the way toward their target outcome and
then be able to look for other bottlenecks and constraints. They could also pursue multiple
issues simultaneously if they have the capacity.
FIGURE 6.8: Identifying a Constraint in the Value Stream
Having narrowed down the constraint, Sharon and the team begin to dig deeper to find
out how to address it.
How to Conduct Value Stream Mapping
Structuring Invitation
Invite representative stakeholders involved in a common value stream to
come together to clarify the current work process so improvements can
be identified. The group maps a path to addressing key questions:
• What sequence of activities constitutes the complete workflow?

-- 135 of 353 --

• What is the measured performance of the complete workflow?
• What is our highest-impact improvement opportunity?
Aim to take about ninety minutes at a brisk pace. Allocate at least
two hours if this is your first time.
How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed
• Use a digital collaboration tool or a physical dry-erase board or
paper and sticky notes.
• Allow for space to lay out eight to twenty distinct steps
horizontally.
How Participation Is Distributed
• The group should include up to ten representatives of the key
contributors to the value stream.
• Everyone participates according to their knowledge of the step in
question and the value stream overall.
How Groups Are Configured
• One main notetaker builds the Value Stream Map on a shared
board.
• Other contributors discuss to add, remove, or amend aspects of
that shared map.
Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation
1. STREAM SELECTION
Start by identifying the particular value stream you seek to improve.
Follow the principles from the “Where’s the Stream?” section presented
earlier in this chapter to help you. (We’ve provided a simplified list here
to help.)

-- 136 of 353 --

• Work backward from a specific customer outcome (e.g., a new
feature delivered).
• Recent: Something in the recent past that you can remember.
• Real: Something that actually has business impact and not merely a
software upgrade.
• Reach: Something that traversed the full value stream.
• Representative: Something typical to how you do work and not an
emergency request.
• Road-tested: Something that is in production, ideally with
telemetry and customer feedback.
2. ADD ACTIVITIES
The whole group works backward from the stage where value is
delivered (see Figure 6.9), plotting each distinct step (as a note or item) in
sequence back to the start of the value stream (the request that triggered
the work). The simplest systems are just a linear sequence of steps. You
may also have parts of the process that run in parallel, in which case you
can denote that by showing one step above the other. (10 mins.)
FIGURE 6.9: Example Value Stream Map for Software Development
3. ADD TIMING
Next, estimate the typical cycle time spent on each step and write this
above that step (10 mins.). Then, estimate the typical delay between each
step and write this
underneath the gap between steps. (10 mins.) Then,
highlight the cycle or wait times with the longest durations as possible
improvement candidates (2 mins.), as shown in Figure 6.10.

-- 137 of 353 --

FIGURE 6.10: Sample Value Stream Map Showing Cycle Timing and Wait Timing
4. ADD DIMENSIONS AND TOTAL METRICS
Sum the total cycle time from all steps and the total wait time between
steps. Then, sum these to determine the end-to-end process (lead time)
duration. Add the totals to the bottom corner of the space. (2 mins.) Add
any extra dimensions that seem relevant to your target outcome, such as
percent complete and accurate (%C&A), and total them if they’re
quantifiable (Figure 6.11).
FIGURE 6.11: Annotated Value Stream Map
This annotated version of the map depicts percent complete and accurate (%C&A)
for each stage, bold text for particular areas of concern, rework (curved arrows) for
stages where errors are detected, and totals for cumulative measures.
Most metrics across the Value Stream Map are summarized by simply
totaling them up. One exception is the %C&A, which is summarized as
the “Rolled %C&A”. This is the product of all the %C&A values in

-- 138 of 353 --

sequence (i.e., 60% × 50% = 30%). This reflects how quality issues at any
stage limit the flow of complete and accurate work at all later stages.
Other information, such as roles owning each stage, can be placed as
colored dots with a corresponding legend, or tools used in each stage can
be depicted in small notes below each stage. (See Figure 6.12.)

-- 139 of 353 --

FIGURE 6.12: Example Small-Scale Value Stream Map
A small-scale Value Stream Map depicting the target outcome, roles, totals, hot
spots, and parallel activities.
5. HIGHLIGHT CONSTRAINT
As a group, identify the improvement candidate (constraint) that would
make the single biggest improvement to the end-to-end duration. This
becomes the target for future work and is the constraint used in

-- 140 of 353 --

Dependency Mapping, as explored in the next chapter. (5 mins.) (See
Figure 6.13.)
FIGURE 6.13: Identifying a Constraint on a Value Stream Map
The workshop is complete when the group can answer the initial
questions with shared confidence:
• What sequence of activities constitutes the complete workflow?
• What is the measured performance of the complete workflow?
• What is our highest-impact improvement opportunity?
Tips and Traps
• Use an Outcome Mapping session to help the group clarify their
goals before starting a Value Stream Mapping session.
• Mapping can be accelerated by providing a scaffold representing a
typical value stream map for that activity, which is then modified by
the group. This can be as simple as the structure shown in Figure
6.10, starting with the steps Request, Plan, Develop, Review, Test,
Deploy, and Release. This not only saves time but provides
participants unfamiliar with Value Stream Mapping a clear
reference point to orient themselves.
• Communicate to the team that the current workflow has evolved in
this way for countless reasons, and we can’t change the past. What’s

-- 141 of 353 --

important is seeing the current reality, accepting it, and working to
improve it. We must start from where we are. There’s no sense
imagining where else we could have been.
• Likewise, avoid referring to the value stream as it is intended to
operate or will operate after improvement. Focus on the most
recent iteration or a representation of several recent iterations.
We’ll get to the future state in Chapter 8.
• The team must remain focused on what happens currently, not
how the process was designed, how it ideally works, or how it will
work in the future. Consider the last time the stream was traversed
—and ideally the last few times to get a more representative sample
for measurement.
• Focus on what’s happening most often. This involves repeatedly
asking the team, “How long does it usually take?” and reminding
them that “it depends” isn’t an acceptable excuse for deliberation.
Recency bias and a number of other cognitive biases hinder our
ability to make these judgments without facilitation.
• If you’re looking for accurate information, it’s helpful to work from
right to left (from customer outcome backward to initiation)
because working backward disrupts the normal process of
reconstructing memories based on expectations and general
knowledge, as Fiona Gabbert, Lorraine Hope, and Ronald P. Fisher
explain in “Protecting Eyewitness Evidence.”9
• Strive to represent a typical, recent flow of the value stream. If the
last iteration wasn’t anomalous, refer back to it specifically. If it was,
you can still use it with clear notation of the anomaly.
• Including a sponsoring stakeholder can deepen their understanding
of the process as well as demonstrate a serious commitment to the
improvement effort. Just make sure a high-powered individual
doesn’t motivate contributors to share overly rosy accounts.

-- 142 of 353 --

• Avoid allowing a few people to dominate the session; check in with
those who have fallen silent to provide input, offer feedback, or ask
questions.
• Don’t try to thoroughly accommodate edge cases. If the flow seems
to branch based on variations in process, capture it in a note but
focus on what happens most often.
• Don’t settle on “it depends” to describe a variable flow of work;
have an expert make a guess and offer it up for a second opinion.
• Don’t aim for precise measurements. For our purposes, rough
estimates are sufficient.
• If you struggle to get input for estimation or any detail, it can help
to make a guess as the facilitator and allow the group to correct you
if they can.
• If there’s disagreement among the participants on how long an
activity takes, unless you can get consensus quickly, simply take the
worst-case time.
• To add an extra dimension of clarity to highly variable timing, you
can capture best-case time and worst-case time. This can reveal the
extent of volatility that causes unpredictable delivery.
• Focus the scope of the Value Stream Map on steps that are within
this group’s ability to influence. It can be demotivating to agonize
over what can’t be changed.
• Information flow is one of the most important additional
dimensions to add to a map, as it can have a serious impact on
quality, throughput, and value. Use Dependency Mapping (see
Chapter 7) to better understand how information flow may be
relevant to the constraint (or candidate constraints).
• It can be very helpful for both a facilitator and the mapping
participants to start from a Customer Journey Map (as depicted in
Figure 6.4) if that map is available and known by most of the

-- 143 of 353 --

participants. Leveraging a familiar frame of reference can be a great
starting point to introduce the value stream to folks who haven’t
seen a Value Stream Map before.
• One of the key gaps that sabotages efforts to effectively map value
streams is constraining the scope before you start. John Cutler
outlines it in a list of traps for visualizing work: “There might be a
high PIP—planning in progress—or lots of work marked as Done,
but not in the hands of customers. There’s a fear that tracking stuff
‘too early’ will ‘muddy up the system.’ There’s a fear that tracking
stuff ‘after finishing’ will make it seem like the team is too slow.”10 If
the full scope of work is not acknowledged, it can’t be addressed.
Riffs and Variations
It pays to have skilled, outside facilitation for this process for a few
reasons:
• A perspective from outside the organization is far less likely to
bring an agenda, bias, or political influence to the process, which
will drive superior results.
• Collaborative mapping can be painful if the group loses an effective
focus, such as drifting into focusing on past decisions rather than
improving the current system of work.
• A skilled facilitator can maintain a positive and constructive
environment for mapping.
• A skilled facilitator knows when digging may turn up gold and
when to move on. They will know what questions to ask and what
seems like a strange measurement based on experience with other
teams.
All of this saves valuable time and maximizes value. Gathering a team
can be expensive if you’re not getting value from the session, and it can

-- 144 of 353 --

impact morale and trust if the team feels they’re wasting time. A skilled
facilitator can likely complete a session in half the time while keeping the
team engaged. You may already have Agile coaches, Scrum facilitators,
dojo trainers, community of practice leads, or teachers in your group.
They may have a head start in building their facilitation skills. It’s all
right to pilot the process with a facilitator and team willing to try and
learn!
Expanded maps can add additional dimensions, including the
following:
• Quality: Percentage of work done completely and accurately to
expectation at each step (referred to as %C&A, percent complete
and accurate).
• Efficiency: Time in each step spent on value-adding work as a
percentage of total time.
• Work in progress: How much work is typically in progress at
each step.
• Queues: Where work items accumulate before being acted on.
• Roles: Which roles are involved in each step.
• Tools: Systems involved in each activity.
• Artifacts and deliverables: What each step produces.
Figure 6.14 depicts how additional dimensions can be added atop a
simple Value Stream Map to add context depending on the target
outcome.

-- 145 of 353 --

FIGURE 6.14: Value Stream Map with VAT and %C&A
A simple Value Stream Map showing added dimensions of value-added time (VAT)
and percent complete and accurate (%C&A) for each stage.
These added dimensions are optional only because, depending on the
target outcome, they may be more or less relevant. It’s valuable to start
simple and layer on detail rather than aim for too much and exceed the
appetite and patience of the group.
Tracking the quality of work at each step typically requires intensive
data-gathering and analysis. It can also be a bit of a sensitive topic when
teams have not previously given each other clear and kind feedback on
work quality. The way of approaching this taught in Karen Martin and
Mike Osterling’s
Value Stream Mapping is to record this as the percent
complete and accurate (%C&A) at each step.11 This metric means what

-- 146 of 353 --

percentage of work leaving this step is both complete and accurate and
thus doesn’t need to be sent back to a previous step for rework and
clarification.
Value Stream Mapping should be performed repeatedly to
periodically reestablish clarity within a team. Once mapping is
performed and improvements are implemented, the constraint will
emerge elsewhere, and mapping can reveal a new constraint candidate to
continue progress. This is often achieved by mapping every three to six
months depending on the scope of improvement.
It’s possible to parallelize the exercise by having each participant
create their own representation of the value stream (and associated data).
These representations can then be presented and discussed with the
team before reconciling them into a unified representation. This
challenges and engages each contributor to refine and build their
understanding. Merging the maps reveals the difference between each
individual perspective, providing clear feedback for each contributor to
learn from. This also provides the most complete “raw data.”
It’s also possible to map asynchronously in environments where buy-
in and time are scarce. Jim Benson, cocreator of Lean Coffee, shared a
story of working with procurement in a large construction firm. He
allowed a big group to build out a map as individual contributors over
five days. Over time, more and more people gathered to build and discuss
the map. In the end, the map lived on the same wall and evolved over the
next six months of value stream improvements.12
There are similar approaches that may be more compatible with your
current practices, such as event storming or swimlane diagrams, but if
there isn’t any form of measurement applied to the flow, it can be
challenging to identify and align on a constraint.
If next steps seem unclear or blocked, you can use 15% Solutions13 to
define a first safe step. This is an exercise from Liberating Structures that
helps people overcome a feeling of overwhelm or powerlessness in the

-- 147 of 353 --

face of large challenges. It prompts participants to answer the question,
“What can you do without more resources or authority that would get
you 15% of the way to a solution?”
It’s possible to map extremely complicated workflows with Value
Stream Mapping, but with added detail comes the trade-off of time and
readability. Aim for the “Goldilocks zone” of just enough detail to take
confident next steps. It may be necessary to craft a map with many notes
or comments to capture the insights and observations of the team, as
shown in pink comment boxes above and below the value stream in
Figure 6.15.
FIGURE 6.15: Sample Value Stream Map with Many Notes
Value Stream Maps can include whatever information is necessary to drive
progress and improvement.
Within a Value Stream Map, you can use visual indicators to draw out
other information. For example, Figure 6.15 shows a variety of colors
representing the following:

-- 148 of 353 --

This allows you to do a quick pass with participants to allow them to
vote on which of the four they think best applies to each stage. This can
help draw attention to critical stages, as opposed to those that may
constitute waste. Ensure the context is made clear: The analysis is
focused on activities, not roles. People get understandably very
concerned when it may be implied that their role is not adding value.

-- 149 of 353 --

Data-Gathering Requirements
It can be tempting to believe that you need to gather all of the relevant data before
starting on a mapping exercise. That temptation leads directly to the overwhelming
reality that data from the development process is typically spread across many
systems, not formatted in the way we need, and potentially inaccurate due to data not
being adequately maintained. Data also ages quickly, and a few inaccurate data points
can distract the group.
But don’t worry! You don’t need high-precision data. Approximate information is
usually the best way to get started. We want to move in small and incremental steps
based on a reasonably accurate image of the whole system we’re managing. Striving
for quality data is a waste of time if you don’t need it to expose a constraint.
Since a typical end-to-end process takes days, weeks, or months, uncertainty on
the order of hours or even days on a single step may be insignificant. The purpose of
Value Stream Mapping is to identify likely bottlenecks in the process so they can be
investigated further with Dependency Mapping (see Chapter 7.) Most teams find that
20% of their existing workflow is waste they can get rid of right away.
Each time you run these mapping exercises for a team, you can supplement your
initial assessments with more accurate and precise data. Chapter 13 goes into detail
about the tools and practices of Value Stream Management as a way to capture and
distill the data needed on an ongoing basis.
Yes, we may miss something by trusting the group’s estimates. But if the
alternative is a mapping process that is long and overwhelming, we suggest aiming for
good enough instead.
CASE STUDY
The Devil is in the Details
When presenting the methods of Flow Engineering at an Agile conference, Steve was
approached by an Agile coach working in a bank. He shared a horror story that had shaken
his faith in Value Stream Mapping and made leadership in the bank skeptical of Value
Stream Mapping in the future. Why? Their mapping efforts took a room full of victims four

-- 150 of 353 --

full days, where they mapped out an exhaustive two-thousand-step release process. In the
end, nobody was happy with the process or the outcome.
They were able to make a second pass and simplify the stream to fifteen steps, but by
that point, they were running on empty and severely demotivated. This is an example of the
value of starting simple with careful facilitation.
One of the most important jobs for the facilitator is driving the process forward, keeping
things simple, and helping the whole group be satisfied with approximations. In Value
Stream Mapping, perfect is definitely the enemy of good. Not only is simplicity an enabling
constraint, it saves costs, morale, and energy.
Conclusion
Effective action depends on clarity. And clarity begins with orienting our
work in its larger context. Value Stream Mapping allows a group to
collectively establish a shared mental model of both the goal of their
work and the method for carrying it out. This seemingly simple exercise
provides individuals with the mental context needed to work effectively
as a team.
Our approach to Value Stream Mapping is distilled from more
complicated traditional techniques to make it approachable and
something teams can engage in regularly. This not only helps improve
performance, but it also helps create a unified understanding of what’s
going on and where we should be focusing our energy.
Stepping back allows us to see the perspectives of others and gain
distance from our daily work. Making work visible and, especially,
visualizing the end-to-end system of work helps us avoid the trap of local
optimization. And measurement provides a qualitative overlay on the
work that allows teams to identify trends and set specific goals.
The result of Value Stream Mapping is identifying likely constraints
that deserve a deeper inspection through Dependency Mapping (as we
explore next). Value Stream Mapping is broad but not deep; Dependency
Mapping is deep but not broad. The goal of the next chapter is to

-- 151 of 353 --

uncover the primary factors contributing to constraints by digging
deeper.
Key Takeaways
• Value Stream Mapping can be quick and effective for sensemaking, alignment, and
setting focus (i.e., building clarity).
• A modest amount of thoughtful measurement can highlight constraints that are
impacting flow.
• Despite the measurement present in the map, simple Value Stream Mapping is
more qualitative than quantitative. Detail and accuracy aren’t necessary to get
valuable insights.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 152 of 353 --

CHAPTER 7
Dependency Mapping
“Everything is connected to everything else, but not
equally strongly.”
DONELLA MEADOWS,
Thinking in Systems
THE PURPOSE OF DEPENDENCY MAPPING is to dig deeper into areas of the
value stream that appear to be constraints in order to build clarity on the
process and metrics of that part of the stream. (See Figure 7.1.)
FIGURE 7.1: Dependency Mapping Primarily Serves to Enhance the Clarity Built by Value
Stream Mapping
Nothing exists in isolation. Value Stream Mapping shows how each
role or part in a process fits into a broader whole. Importantly, Value
Stream Mapping can also reveal the impediments to flow for a team. An
exhaustive Value Stream Mapping process would include fine-grained
process mapping and detailed metrics gathering at every step in the
process. But the rapid Value Stream Mapping done in Flow Engineering

-- 153 of 353 --

does not require detailed metrics on each step of the value stream. We
intentionally sacrifice precision for speed and ease. We aim to gather just
enough information to identify a critical constraint.
Dependency Mapping is specifically designed to improve the
resolution on this critical constraint so we can identify precise remedies.
Dependency Mapping also gives us a chance to investigate the chain of
dependencies that contribute to the critical constraint.
The technical equivalent to this practice is a “trace,” such as a stack
trace of a running application or tracing the route of a packet through a
network, allowing you to discover and then debug a problem by isolating
a general area and then digging deep. With Dependency Mapping, we
also aim to gather just enough information to uncover viable
opportunities for improvement. We’re not aiming to map every
dependency across every stage of the Value Stream Map. Instead, we’re
aiming simply to run a trace on a problematic section of the flow (as
shown in Figure 7.2) so the return on invested time and effort is
extremely high.
FIGURE 7.2: Dependency Mapping Targets Only Dependencies That Impact the Constraint

-- 154 of 353 --

One of the biggest risks in any improvement initiative is improving
the wrong thing. Extra processing is one of the seven types of waste
identified in Lean (see Chapter 8.) It’s wasteful to improve part of the
process that doesn’t have a significant impact on the whole. It’s also
wasteful to gather more data than necessary to determine where
improvements can be found. The purpose of Dependency Mapping is to
challenge our assumptions about where problems lie by digging deeper
into likely hot spots.
There are countless optimizations that a team could make, but all but
a few of them are useless in improving throughput and quality. Figure 7.3
shows some of the many dependencies a team might have, but it doesn’t
provide any clear indications of which might need to be addressed to
improve performance. The combination of Value Stream Mapping (for
comprehensiveness at a low resolution) and Dependency Mapping (to
improve resolution and identify indirect causes of problems) provides a
way to identify improvements that can have a material effect on team
performance.

-- 155 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.3: Example of the Extent of Dependencies
Visualizing all of a team’s dependencies can be useful but doesn’t identify what
might need to improve.
There are several types of diagrams that show cross-team or cross-
system dependencies, but they’re rarely able to show the impact of those
dependencies on the flow of work. And they’re rarely linked to a
constraint, which means they take longer to produce and can be
distracting. Our focus is primarily on finding the constraint holding back
a single value stream. However, it’s common that addressing that
constraint will also aid many other streams. The goal is a Pareto Effect

-- 156 of 353 --

(or Pareto Principle)—that is, achieving 80% of the impact with 20% of
the effort.
What Is Dependency Mapping?
Dependency mapping is a lightweight collaborative process for building
clarity on a value stream’s key dependencies. The constraint in the value
stream is analyzed to identify any external teams, information, tools, or
processes required for that piece of work. This is often the starting point
for a cross-team investigation to address the limitation. Similar to
technical Dependency Mapping, where you reveal all the libraries, APIs,
databases, etc. that an application requires to operate, we do the same
here—but for workflow.
As shown in Figure 7.4, there are five stages to Dependency Mapping:
1. Start with constraints.
2. Zoom in on a constraint by creating a sub-Value Stream Map.
3. Identify hot spots.
4. Identify direct causes for hot spots.
5. Dig deeper into the constraint.
FIGURE 7.4: The Five Stages of Dependency Mapping

-- 157 of 353 --

With these stages, we gain a clear understanding of the dependencies
most impacting the constraint and which focal point within the
dependencies will enable the most effective improvement.
What Do We Mean by Dependencies?
As with the other maps, Dependency Mapping begins with visibility: we
need to become aware of and be able to communicate direct and indirect
dependencies and their impact on the team before we can hope to
address them. In Dependency Mapping, we identify the immediate
dependencies that cause a constraint and which team is responsible for
them. We then dig into understanding what processes underlie that
dependency and whether those processes depend on other groups.
Often, we don’t have the knowledge needed to define these additional
levels, which means that even mapping dependencies requires us to
collaborate with leaders in other departments. Since addressing those
dependencies will almost certainly require collaboration from other
departments, beginning by building shared clarity alongside other teams
is a powerful foundation for making improvements.
Factors that can cause a constraint are endless, so open discussion is
important so that everyone can share insights and compare perspectives.
Remember, assumptions on how to improve are just hypotheses at this
point. Only by carrying out the change and demonstrating improvement
can we be sure that we correctly identified the constraint and the
appropriate remedy. Such is life.
This experimental approach can be found in Lean, Agile, and DevOps
management approaches and requires an intellectual honesty that is rare
but priceless in the business world. Factors that can cause constraints
include other shared services departments, excessive meetings, approval
processes, challenging work, too much work in progress, etc.
There can be internal constraints (e.g., there is only a single
individual capable of performing a complicated activity or there are tools

-- 158 of 353 --

that we can’t use effectively) or external constraints (e.g., a team we hand
work off to or a mandatory approval process).
One team we worked with revealed that a process they depended on
in each development sprint required them to submit a request to a
shared services group. There was a three-business-day service level
agreement (SLA) on that request that caused the team to delay parts of
their work almost twice a month.
A common example of an external dependency that can affect the
team’s ability to deliver value is reliance on a Program Management
Office (PMO). It’s common for PMOs to evaluate requests using a
committee composed of part-time participants from other groups. To
limit the time required for these members, they often meet only once a
month to review the product planning process. In this situation, some
decisions may have to wait until the next PMO meeting (or longer)
before they can be reviewed and approved. So teams seeking to
experiment with an architectural change may first need to get approval
from the PMO. Such delays can impact the team’s velocity in very serious
ways.
Even more commonly, Change Advisory Boards (CABs) sometimes
require evaluation of any production change. A change review process
that involves architects from outside the team doing the development is
often more “change theater” than an actual protective layer. It is rarely
possible for a part-time member of a CAB to invest the time and possess
the knowledge required to thoroughly evaluate the possible impacts of a
change. Decisions are often made on more superficial grounds, such as
trusting the track record of the team requesting the change.
Another example is when we need the operations team to customize
an environment to support a new feature by installing or upgrading a
software package or changing configuration. That process might
consistently take four days each time because a four-day SLA has been
set. Teams tend to treat the SLA like a deadline and prioritize other work

-- 159 of 353 --

in progress until the SLA is coming to an end. Such a cross-team
dependency can impact work in almost every sprint and can account for
much of the lead time in delivering a new feature.
Visualizing these dependencies allows the team to think together
about the basis of beliefs and observations that have been made explicit.
Any member on the team or outside the team is free to review or
question the observations because they’ve been made visible instead of
being buried in an email or lost in a distant conversation. It rarely makes
sense for a team to do everything themselves. We need to rely on other
teams, and nothing is ever truly autonomous. Making structural changes
to these team dependencies can often be the most powerful
improvements we can make to a process to improve flow.
What Dependency Mapping Enables
It’s incredibly easy to foster misunderstanding in a large, siloed environment. Each
group often has its own goals, agenda, and workload, combined with a unique
perspective. If one team is being impacted by another, it can be extremely challenging
to get on the same page with a ticket, a document, or even a meeting. Having visual
resources allows you to point to specific pain points and show the larger context of
what you’re working with and aiming to achieve. This can work wonders to bridge the
gaps created by silos. Beyond that, maps can provide a tool to build mutual respect,
empathy, and even relationships.
Why Dependency Mapping Works: Finding Clogs and Leaks to
Enable Flow
There are three main benefits of this approach to Dependency Mapping:
• Only dig where there’s gold. There’s no need to analyze or
understand every dependency in the value stream. Your value

-- 160 of 353 --

stream also doesn’t exist in a vacuum. Often, the biggest roadblocks
are caused by connections to other areas of the organization or lack
of internal skills, tools, or resources. By focusing on the most
impactful constraint, you can most efficiently and effectively use
your time and effort to diagnose the constraint without trying to
boil the ocean.
• Maps can be a Rosetta Stone. Maps facilitate constructive
conversations with peers who don’t necessarily speak your
language. Addressing dependencies often requires us to cross
organizational boundaries, build alliances, and understand others’
points of view and priorities. While that might be unfamiliar
territory for some, making such changes can bring enormous
benefits to the organization and to the teams involved. With a
Dependency Map, you can share a visual representation of your
constraint with groups that may be unfamiliar with your value
stream and provide them just enough context to help or point you
in the right direction.
• Get a deeper understanding of what people actually do.
Shared services and complicated subsystem teams like databases or
infrastructure can seem like a black box from the outside. A
Dependency Map provides a visual resource to enable a productive
conversation with groups outside your own. With the map, you can
highlight unknowns and make it easier for others to fill in gaps in
your understanding. While you’re at it, you can develop and
demonstrate an understanding of what external parties are
contributing to the value stream. This helps you cultivate a mutual
understanding, trust, and a productive relationship.
BOLT GLOBAL
Continued

-- 161 of 353 --

By mapping their value stream, Sharon’s team identified a constraint and a catch. The most
impactful constraint in their release flow—the environment setup process—was not actually
handled by Sharon’s team. They depend on an infrastructure team to provision new
environments and data, a process that could take up to twelve days. This step had to be
done for every release to ensure they had clean development and testing environments for
each of Sharon’s three teams. (See Figure 7.5.)
FIGURE 7.5: Dependency Map of the Constraint: Environment Setup
Sharon’s team has many dependencies. But the ones she needs to focus on are
those that impact her constraint.

-- 162 of 353 --

The infrastructure team is run by Karl. His team looks after all the development, testing,
and production environments for a dozen product teams. His team is always swamped with
work, including constant interruptions from production issues and notifications. They also
have long-running projects that they’ve been working on, for years in some cases. Karl has
to essentially ignore any external requests or risk drowning entirely. He’s at or above
capacity at all times. There’s no room for his team to even think about Sharon and her
concerns. Even if they were aware of Sharon’s target, how could they justify helping out?
Karl’s team is very cohesive. They deal with very similar situations every day, so they have
very similar perceptions, goals, and activities. This creates a strong team identity. But they
regard other teams outside of theirs as entirely separate, somewhat antagonistic groups—
even though they work within the same organization. They’re
others. This self-other
dichotomy affects the way the team perceives and values others, as well as their views,
intentions, and activities.
Creating cohesion and a unification of effort across an entire organization requires
aligning those views, intentions, activities, and identities. This focus can dramatically
increase the power of peoples’ efforts, much as a weak light can be amplified like a laser if
the wavelengths become coherent. As shown in Figure 7.6 (see page 118), shared value
facilitates shared clarity. Shared clarity facilitates shared activity. Shared activity facilitates
collective identity.
FIGURE 7.6: Gap between Sharon’s Team and Karl’s Team
Bridging the gap between Sharon and Karl requires sharing value, clarity, and
activity.

-- 163 of 353 --

Issues of value, clarity, and flow become harder as you scale the size of a team. For
example, Karl and Sharon possess two very different perspectives. They deal with totally
different systems, totally different people, and totally different concerns on a day-to-day
basis. As a result, they’ve also got different goals, so their values are not naturally aligned.
The classic tension between development and operations in software development arises
because developers are tasked with implementing change, whereas operations is tasked
with maintaining stability. Individual subgroups within an organization might want to
maximize something or minimize something, but as we become more influential in an
organization, the challenge increasingly becomes how to appreciate competing points of
view and balance competing priorities.
Based on her limited perspective, Sharon might place the blame on Karl, complain about
his team, or simply feel powerless and stuck. Such feelings are natural, even if they don’t
contribute toward a solution. Instead, they tend to make everyone feel unpleasant and
pessimistic. One enemy of collaboration is blaming others and feeling entitled that our
problems should be everyone else’s top priorities. We can’t solve every problem, and we
won’t always succeed in solving even our main problems, but by focusing on specific issues
and taking a skillful and strategic approach to addressing them, we maximize our chances of
improvement.
As shown in Figure 7.7, Sharon has three assets that she can use to make a case for
collaboration. By sharing the Outcome Map, she can help Karl understand how her target
outcome is serving shared organizational and customer goals. The Value Stream Map
provides a visualization to discuss how she’s isolated environment provisioning as a key
bottleneck in her team’s end-to-end process. And the Dependency Map provides details on
how the bottleneck she identified is tied to Karl’s team.

-- 164 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.7: Three Assets for Collaboration
When you’re addressing cross-team dependencies, it’s helpful to take another
pass at the Outcome, Value Stream, and Dependency Maps together with leaders
from those teams to align perspectives.
This gives Sharon and Karl a chance to jointly discuss the overarching context, to raise
doubts and challenges, to identify unknowns, and to specify measures of success. The key in
this process is that Sharon and Karl (and any other relevant members of their teams) are
jointly involved in the problem-solving process. The power of working together toward a
solution in this thinking process can’t be overstated.
This is a chance for Sharon to become aware of Karl’s doubts and concerns and for them
both to acknowledge the additional learning that they may need to do to find a solution.
Their next step is to jointly create a Dependency Map for the environment creation part of
the process. In this context, Sharon’s team (and other teams within the organization) is a
customer of Karl’s team. This new diagram is shown in Figure 7.8 (see page 120).

-- 165 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.8: The Dependency Map Jointly Created by Karl and Sharon
Creating the Dependency Map for environment setup was a useful exercise for Karl. His
team was very familiar with that process but had never taken the time to visualize it or
measure the associated times. Many of his team’s planned and desired improvement
initiatives would impact this process, but he had not previously thought about how those
improvements would impact other departments’ workflows. Some of these points seem
obvious when stated but can be easily overlooked in the busyness of daily work.
Together they investigated the environment setup process to gain a shared
understanding of how they could each contribute to a better state of flow. Often in hand-off
situations, there is information or a communication mechanism that could be easily
improved to makes everyone’s work more efficient and effective.
Digging deeper into the dependencies revealed that Karl’s team is short on capacity and
could benefit immensely from some of the engineering capabilities inside Sharon’s team.
His team relies on scripts written in the Go programming language, but they have only one
Go specialist on their team. Karl and Sharon agreed on some shared efforts that leverage
Sharon’s team’s skills to automate some of Karl’s most challenging responsibilities. In this
way, they identified areas they can trade efforts for each other’s mutual benefit.
In this scenario, successfully connecting and collaborating across organizational
boundaries lifted a constraint in a way that benefits both groups.

-- 166 of 353 --

How to Map Dependencies
Structuring Invitation
Invite stakeholders from inside and outside the team who have a deep
understanding of the constrained step and its dependencies to come
together to further clarify the current state. Summarize the value of the
target outcome identified previously and the constraint that was
clarified. The group maps a path to addressing the following key
questions:
• What is the precise process through which this step is enabled?
• What are typical timings of the sub-steps in that process?
• What other challenges are we aware of in this process?
How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed
• Use a digital collaboration tool or an actual dry-erase board/paper
and sticky notes.
• Allow both vertical and horizontal space to map out direct and
indirect dependencies and capabilities.
How Participation Is Distributed
• Include up to ten representatives with deep knowledge of the
constraint and its dependencies.
• Everyone participates according to their knowledge of the
dependencies in question.
How Groups Are Configured
• One main notetaker builds the Dependency Map on a shared
board.
• Other contributors discuss to add, remove, or amend aspects of
that shared map.

-- 167 of 353 --

Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation
1. START WITH CONSTRAINTS
Make a copy of your Value Stream Map if you can easily do so. To
simplify the visualization, you can remove all the data that doesn’t relate
to the constraint you identified at the end of your Value Stream Mapping
session. For example, in the Bolt Global illustration, their focus
constraint was “Environment Setup.” (See also Figure 7.9.)
FIGURE 7.9: Suspected Constraint Identified in Value Stream Mapping
2. ZOOM IN ON A CONSTRAINT
With this joint team, zoom in on the constraint by creating a quick sub–
Value Stream Map. This map should analyze the sub-steps that make up
the constraint, as shown in Figure 7.10.
FIGURE 7.10: Example Sub–Value Stream Map
Illustrate the activities that make up the dependency.
3. IDENTIFY HOT SPOTS

-- 168 of 353 --

Work with the joint team to identify where work is most constrained
and the impact of those constraints (wait times). Rough estimates should
be enough to highlight areas of concern. Figure 7.11 shows two extended
waiting periods after “ticket intake” and after “spin up.” These are areas
to dig into for further analysis.
FIGURE 7.11: A Sub–Value Stream Map to Illustrate the Dependent Workflow
4. IDENTIFY DIRECT CAUSES FOR HOT SPOTS
From the hot spots, add any internal or external dependencies that affect
the performance of the step(s) involved. (See Figure 7.12.) Examples
include:
• limited staff/capacity
• budget constraints
• equipment availability
• technology limitations
• skill set of team members
• approval processes by other departments
• interdepartmental coordination and communication
• dependency on support from other teams (e.g., IT, HR)

-- 169 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.12: Direct Causes of Hot Spots
Identify causes of hot spots and areas beyond the group’s control. Approval to
increase environment capacity is noted in orange as beyond the group’s
immediate ability to influence.
5. DIG DEEPER INTO THE CONSTRAINT
The Five Whys is a simple approach made famous by the Lean
movement. For the most impactful constraint, we simply ask why that
constraint exists. We continue digging deeper into each answer,
uncovering more and more whys behind the main constraint. Figure 7.13
illustrates how this digging can reveal an opportunity for improvement.

-- 170 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.13: Practice the Five Whys to Dig Deeper into the Suspected Constraint
Tips and Traps
• Always remember that you’re on the same team as those you
depend on!
• Consider conflicting incentives. If the group you depend on is
incentivized to do nothing, then don’t expect them to jump at the
chance to help you out. For example, if your focus is innovation and
change and the team you depend on is rewarded for stability and
consistency, you’ll have to carefully present the common ground
that appeals to you both.
• Be ready with your Outcome Map and Value Stream Map to share
context on what you’re trying to accomplish and what you’ve done
so far. By presenting a compelling target outcome (which you can

-- 171 of 353 --

ideally link to your dependencies’ goals and incentives), you may be
able to win favor across the aisle. Likewise, by demonstrating that
you’ve considered other options and you’ve identified a clear
constraint, you can show that you’ve done your homework and
you’re not needlessly demanding assistance.
• Service level agreements (SLAs)—either explicit or implicit—can eat
up a significant portion of lead time if there’s little incentive to act
as quickly as possible. Like any time window, it’s subject to
Parkinson’s Law (i.e., “Work expands so as to fill the time available
for its completion.”1). That means it can be safe to assume that any
dependency with an SLA will consume the maximum time the SLA
allows.
• Approach Dependency Mapping with curiosity, not accusation or
demand. As Stephen Covey advises in	
The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective People, “Seek first to understand, then to be understood.”2
• Leverage the same IKEA-effect principle you’ve benefited from
elsewhere. By collaborating, you’re more likely to gain alignment
and buy-in.
Riffs and Variations
• Dependency Mapping can be a powerful way to plan for disaster
recovery scenarios, assess security vulnerabilities, or reimagine how
to reduce costs from a more holistic perspective than a single
stream.
• A dependency matrix allows you to comprehensively map
dependencies from team to team across large sections of your
organization. If you’re looking for a more comprehensive
representation, a dependency matrix can cover a large number of
teams and interactions.

-- 172 of 353 --

• Wardley mapping can be useful to explore the strategic impact of
interdependent capabilities. If you have the time, energy, buy-in,
and expected value to look beyond your constraint, it can be a
useful investment in a systems-level view.
• A SIPOC Diagram (Suppliers, Inputs, Process, Outputs, Customers)
can be used to describe process dependencies in further detail.
• A RACI Matrix (Responsible, Accountable, Consulted, Informed)
can be used to describe human dependencies (approvals, meetings,
consultations) in further detail.
CASE STUDY
Revisiting the Checkbox Project
The Checkbox Project mentioned in Chapter 1 and similar org-spanning initiatives often
suffer from extremes of under analysis or over analysis. On one hand, if a team spends too
much time analyzing and plotting out every possible dependency for every initiative, they’ll
never get started with the actual work, and a lot of that effort will be wasted with
dependencies of little or no consequence. On the other hand, charging into the work
without any analysis is like running barefoot through a room full of LEGOs with the lights off.
The secret, untold story of the Checkbox Project is that not only do similar efforts happen
often, but the Checkbox Project depicted in the case represented the third attempt to
implement the checkbox. Not only that, but these types of cross-cutting projects are not
uncommon and typically involve all the same dependencies, as shown in Figure 7.14. That
means the organization could have looked at prior and similar attempts and mapped a
representative value stream and dependencies to understand how to proceed more
effectively.

-- 173 of 353 --

FIGURE 7.14: A Visualization of Dependencies across the Flow of the Checkbox Project
The complexity of the Checkbox Project is not unusual, but it often goes unaddressed
because of the common model of project ways of working in organizations. Because
initiatives like the Checkbox Project were treated as one-off efforts (despite a long history of
similar attempts), they never had a chance to design a high-performing, sustainable flow.
Another often overlooked consideration about dependent teams and shared services is
that they all have preexisting workloads and priorities that get interrupted by every project
that falls in their lap. In the case of the Checkbox Project, they faced issues like these:
• The middleware team was in the middle of upgrading their architecture to support
future volume.
• The front-end team had externally facing botnet attacks and was firefighting WAF
protection.
• The BI team was just put into a new org with different priorities.
Every other group had a similar story. As a result of disrupting all of these teams by
“bringing the work to them,” they suffered the disengagement, disorientation, and
distraction of large-scale interdependent work without having the opportunity to improve
flow through continuous improvement of a value stream.
Without a way to engineer a solution, dependencies will continue to be a problem for the
next project
Conclusion

-- 174 of 353 --

Most teams are under substantial internal and external pressure to
improve performance. It’s common for teams to be hard on themselves if
they can’t perform as well as they want. It’s also common for those
higher in the organization to ask for or demand higher performance.
These internal pressures are often proxies for competitive pressures
outside the organization.
Psychological pressure without psychological clarity just creates
stress and fear. Being able to see and understand dependencies allows
teams to become more conscious of the environment in which they’re
working: the external or internal dependencies that impact their ability
to sustainably deliver a high level of performance.
Mapping dependencies can guide a team to clarity by surfacing the
factors that need to be increased, changed, or reduced to unlock greater
throughput. Insourcing, collaboration, workarounds, and renegotiating
expectations can help address the limits of external dependencies.
Targeted training, redistribution of work, and targeted investments of
time, work, or money can all augment internal capabilities.
Nothing exists independently. Seeing our outer and inner
dependencies gives us the insight we need to rise to new challenges and
make effective changes. Increasing a team’s autonomy to engage with
customers, define their product direction, supply solutions to their own
needs, and rapidly deliver to customers enables both effectiveness and
joy in work.

-- 175 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Delivering work through a value stream relies on external dependencies and
internal capabilities.
• To address bottlenecks in a value stream, begin by identifying key dependencies
and capabilities that support that part of the process.
• Dependencies that inhibit the team may require working across departments to
limit the dependency, increase those capabilities, or enable the team to self-
service.
• Dependency or capability improvements that are focused on improving the value
stream allow teams to build a clear business case for the improvements.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 176 of 353 --

CHAPTER 8
Future State Value Stream Mapping
“When we start thinking about ways to line up all of the
essential steps needed to get a job done into a steady,
continuous flow, it changes everything.”
JAMES P. WOMACK AND DANIEL T. JONES,
Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and
Create Wealth in Your Corporation
THERE ARE THREE KINDS OF VALUE STREAM MAPS: Current State Maps, Ideal
State Maps, and Future State Maps. Current State Maps are a view of
what’s happening right now. We introduced these in Chapter 6.
FIGURE 8.1: Future State Mapping Opens the Door to Enabling Flow
Ideal State Maps depict what the value stream would look like in an
ideal world if we had all the necessary capabilities and resources and
could remove all wait time between steps. The purpose of the Ideal State
Map is to determine the upper limit of possible improvements and to

-- 177 of 353 --

elicit creative ideas from the team about how processes might be
restructured.
By definition, teams will never reach an ideal state. But this map acts
as a constant beacon for improvements and a place to park our most
creative vision of how the team might perform. The Ideal State Map
serves to inspire people and is a worthwhile exercise when you have time
and buy-in.
But, for the purposes of Flow Engineering, when we are looking at
fast mapping to get us to our targets, we’re going to concentrate on the
Future State Map, which serves as the near-term achievable target.
Future State Maps are pragmatic estimates of what an improved
value stream might look like in six months. The Future State Map
becomes the basis for determining actions to take with the Flow
Roadmap described in Chapter 9 and forms the foundation for enabling
improved flow.
FIGURE 8.2: Current, Ideal, and Future State Maps
Each of these variations of a Value Stream Map represents different potential
states for the same workflow.

-- 178 of 353 --

Mapping the Ideal State Value Stream
With any significant undertaking, it’s helpful to begin with a clear vision of what’s
possible. Such a vision is important not because it reflects a reality we may ever
inhabit, but because it liberates energy for the project and aligns the team around a
common goal. The biggest challenge in large organizational initiatives is getting the
team aligned around a common vision; lack of shared and sustained vision is the most
frequent reason such initiatives fail. Thus, investing in building such a clear vision is
critically important at the outset.
The Ideal State Map has the same structure as the Current State Map (see Chapter
6) but represents the smoothest version of the workflow that we can imagine. What is
the theoretical maximum sustainable speed and ease with which this work could be
completed?
Lean practitioners famously strive for single-piece flow. If there was only one piece
of work to be completed at a time, how quickly could it be planned, built, tested,
documented, and deployed? Imagining single-piece flow helps teams identify the
maximum achievable speed, the speed without wait time due to batching or
multitasking. Most wait time arises because teams have large amounts of work
already in progress, preventing them from immediately taking action on a new piece
of work as soon as it’s ready. Instead, work piles up and waits around.
Reducing or eliminating wait time can often reduce lead time by 80% or more. But
the team can still look more deeply at processes that currently take a long time. Is
there a practical way that we could imagine it getting done more quickly? What if the
subcomponents required for a step were pre-created and readily available? What if
there were two or more people who could work on one step in parallel? Is a process
simple enough that it could be delegated to other workers who are less busy?
If your Current State Map has identified other areas of concern, such as process
quality at a particular step, this is an opportunity to imagine how quality could be built
into the process at each step. Quality cannot be added to a work item later in a flow, it
must be ensured from the beginning. Can or should we enable particular aspects of
quality at an earlier step? Instead of doing a code review later in a process, could we
use pair programming to ensure quality during development? Should our user stories
be validated in detail with a customer at the outset? Could working prototypes
provide a faster way to get feedback rather than going all the way through the
development process?

-- 179 of 353 --

This creative reimagining of the work process opens the door to dramatic
performance improvements. Think of the impact of replacing a three-day server
provisioning process with spinning up a Docker container in less than a minute.
Imagine replacing a manual compliance process with an automated attestation
process. Such transformations may require work to implement, but crafting an Ideal
State Map establishes the business case for such improvements from the outset.
In this way, the Ideal State Map defines a theoretical maximum speed, ease, and
quality that we could achieve as a team. Not every proposed improvement can or
should be carried out, but this sets a high goal for us to strive for. But which of these
improvements should we actually prioritize? That analysis is the purpose of defining a
Future State Map.
What Is Future State Mapping?
Future State Mapping is a way of enabling better flow by visualizing a
desired target state and identifying gaps between it and your current
state. A Future State Map adopts the same format as a Value Stream Map
with two differences:
1. It depicts an intended future state for the value stream rather
than the current state.
2. It is annotated with the improvement opportunities required to
get to that future state.
Future State Mapping supports the practice of the Improvement
Kata. As mentioned in Chapter 2, the Improvement Kata is a practice of
continuous improvement (kaizen) through iteratively identifying a
future target state (planning), working to achieve that state (doing),
analyzing the new current state (studying), and adjusting the process
based on observations (acting). This Plan-Do-Study-Act (PDSA) cycle is
also known as the Deming or Shewhart cycle. The goal is to establish
improvement as a habit.

-- 180 of 353 --

In this case, the Future State Map establishes the future target state
we are seeking (Plan). The Flow Roadmap introduced in the next chapter
offers guidance on how to move toward that future state (Do). After a
predetermined period (typically three months), we reassess the current
state through Value Stream Mapping to determine the effectiveness of
our interventions (Study) and improve or adapt (Act). We then proceed
to define a new target state, and the PDSA cycle resumes. As the team
builds familiarity with the process, they can accomplish these activities
more quickly. You may also recognize this iterative process as a
cybernetic loop, as introduced in Chapter 2.
Three months is typically long enough to allow for dramatic change
but short enough to be able to predict a possible future and follow up in
a timely way. This Improvement Kata cycle is depicted in Figure 8.3. The
Outcome Map defines the target (1), the Current State Map and
Dependency Map (2) inform the improvements to define a Future State
Map (3), which informs the Flow Roadmap crafted in the next chapter to
define the path to the future state (4).
FIGURE 8.3: Flow Engineering Cycle of Mapping as an Improvement Kata
Future State Mapping happens in four stages, shown in Figure 8.4:
1. Review the target outcome and findings from previous maps.
2. Identify targets for improvement.
3. Redesign the stream.
4. Measure the future state.

-- 181 of 353 --

FIGURE 8.4: The Four Stages of Future State Mapping
Why Future State Mapping Works
Future State Mapping brings several specific benefits:
• Envisioning a future “how.” It’s too easy to get caught up in
daily work and lose sight of our target outcome, but a target
outcome alone doesn’t demonstrate how we might reach that
outcome. A Future State Map creates a vision of flow that embodies
or enables our target outcome.
• Providing a cybernetic target. Establishes the clearest target
state that we want to achieve. This refines the target set in
Outcome Mapping and continues to leverage our cybernetic
approach: establishing a target condition and navigating in that
direction.
• Enabling continuous and discontinuous improvement.
Allows us to define not only improvements to flow but also
complete reinventions of it. The map can show improvements like
elimination of waste, better information flow, changes to role
ownership of steps, etc. The map can also show dramatic
reinvention, such as reorganization, elimination, parallelization,
etc.

-- 182 of 353 --

• Enabling system interventions beyond the team. The
constraints in our workflow are often due to dependencies outside
the team. We need to be able to “work across the aisle” with
colleagues in other departments to envision flow improvements
that will benefit the whole organization. The Future State Map
provides a clear, shared artifact to define “where we’re headed” and
facilitate conversations with others.
• Eliminating waste. Continuous elimination of waste is the
essence of Lean. Physical work can easily waste physical materials.
In knowledge work, waste primarily takes the form of wasted time,
energy, money, and human potential.

-- 183 of 353 --

What Do We Mean by Waste?
In the dynamic landscape of knowledge work, efficiency is critical, but it can be hard
to find. Looking for waste can be one of the easiest ways to boost both productivity
and morale. Some waste is obvious when pointed out, but we just haven’t noticed it—
and it can be difficult to see without a map to call it out.
Value Stream Mapping has traditionally targeted various types of waste in the
physical world. In knowledge work, the eight wastes of Lean can be summarized by
the acrostic DOWNTIME:
Defects: e.g., bugs, test and automation failures, rework, unplanned revisions,
inadequate knowledge transfer, missing documentation/information. Quality
controls such as code reviews, automated tests, architectural reviews, and so forth
are ways of ensuring that work meets quality thresholds at each step of the value
stream. Such controls have a variety of impacts and can also add delay or cost to our
work. It’s important to see these kinds of quality controls in the broader context of
optimizing delivery and not just assume they should always be in place for every
kind of work. Optimizing delivery is a fine balancing act, and teams can benefit as
much from limiting controls as they can from expanding controls.
Overproduction: e.g., features never/rarely used, abandoned tasks, data
duplication.
Waiting: e.g., delays, slow handoffs, queuing, waiting for approvals,
unnecessary/inefficient meetings. Parallelizing processes where possible can be a
way to reduce waiting. Wait time often emerges because people later in a value
stream are not available to begin working as soon as work arrives. This leads to
accumulated work in progress. This accumulation is a drain on contributors who
consider waiting and queued items still active, while others consider it “out of sight
and out of mind.”
Non-utilized talent: e.g., missing capabilities, insufficient tooling, inadequate
training, underutilized staff, bad/missing incentives, lost morale. The waste of
human potential is the most tragic waste.

-- 184 of 353 --

Transport: e.g., moving data between different teams/systems/databases/tools,
manual handoffs, unnecessary business travel. Removing handoffs and middlemen
from a flow is a way of reducing transport. Working to provide self-service tooling
for other teams is also a way to lower transport costs.
Inventory: e.g., queues, backlogs, work in development/staging environments, work
in progress/process (WIP), code/design branches. Work in progress is the silent
killer of productivity. It brings no benefit to customers and burdens workers with
increased context switching and confusion. Knowledge work accumulates easily
and invisibly, with no theoretical limit to how much half-finished work a person or
team may accumulate. In
Making Work Visible, Dominica DeGrandis amplifies David
Anderson’s maxim “stop starting and start finishing.” By focusing on shipping work
before taking on any new work, you reduce the amount of work in progress. This
step is critical to prevent the silent cost of task switching (humans can’t multitask
activities that require conscious thought) and to reduce wait time.
Motion: e.g., unnecessary handoffs, context switching, data transfer/duplication,
moving work to development/staging environments. Reducing detrimental
cognitive load can help reduce motion waste. When tasks (or distractions) exceed
our cognitive capacity, the information that is germane to our work fades from our
working memory. We compensate by repeatedly switching between tasks, checking
references, and so forth, all of which creates inefficiency in our process.
Extra processing: e.g., unnecessary gates/approvals, excess requirement details,
unnecessary approvals, unnecessary reviews/validation, gold-plating, excess
internal user acceptance testing (UAT), excess external UAT, doing thorough
analysis when rough data will suffice, creating polished docs when rough docs will
suffice. Simplifying and modularizing architecture can reduce the waste of extra
processing by allowing us to solve simpler and more constrained problems.
Dominica DeGrandis also laid out a simple list that summarizes waste in the
context of time (the five time thieves) and the impact on individual contributors:1
• Too much work in progress: Work started but not yet finished.
• Unknown dependencies: Something unexpected that needs to happen in order
to finish work.
• Unplanned work: Interruptions that prevent you from finishing.

-- 185 of 353 --

• Conflicting priorities: Projects and tasks that compete with each other for
attention.
• Neglected work: Partially completed work that sits idle.
In almost every case, these types of waste can’t be perfectly eliminated, but they
should be known and managed intentionally. Key to Value Stream Mapping’s “value-
added time” are two factors to consider when thinking about waste:
Would our
customer happily pay for this activity? Balanced against:
Would removing this
undermine the value to customers, stakeholders, or contributors?
BOLT GLOBAL
Future State Mapping
Initially, it didn’t occur to Sharon that she might have to reach out to other teams to address
the issues her own team was facing. By digging into the constraint, she discovered the need
to work with Karl to address dependencies out of her control. By understanding the
contributing factors from Karl’s perspective, she could see which countermeasures were
likely to deliver performance improvement.
Sharon and Karl collaboratively pinpointed areas for improvement, such as improving
information flow and automating handoffs, but a breakthrough happened when Sharon
shared the Dependency Map with her team and they discovered that the capacity issue
delaying environment changes could be addressed by a member of her team. This person
could write code and issue pull requests for Karl’s team and train a backup person to
prevent a single person from being a bottleneck. They have also been toying with the idea of
forming a guild to train others on how to do the same across multiple teams.
The team emerged with a streamlined vision for the software development life cycle. The
vision involved a significant reduction in the number of steps from idea inception to product
release. Now, handoffs between roles are smoother, and there’s a newfound focus on
automation and collaboration. Both Sharon’s and Karl’s teams feel more engaged, aligned,
empowered, and focused on what will really move them forward.
This mapping lays the groundwork for a more agile and responsive flow of work. It sets
the stage for the team to work toward doubling their release frequency, aligning with the
organizational goal of accelerated software delivery.
How Future State Mapping Works

-- 186 of 353 --

Structuring Invitation
Armed with new insights from the Dependency Mapping session,
reconvene the team involved in the original Value Stream Mapping
exercise, along with any other key people from the Dependency Mapping
session, to strategize on proposed changes.
The purpose of this session is to point out the precise constraints
identified in the Dependency Mapping session, strategize on alternative
workflows that would address the constraint in question, and set a vision
for the target future state workflow.
How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed
• Use a digital collaboration tool or an actual dry-erase board/paper
and sticky notes.
• The workspace is designed similarly to the Value Stream Mapping
session.
How Participation Is Distributed
• Everyone participates equally.
• It’s particularly important to get involvement from those who are
most affected by or responsible for the constraints.
How Groups Are Configured
• One main notetaker builds the Future State Map on a shared board.
• Other contributors discuss to add, remove, or amend aspects of
that shared map.
Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation (60 Mins.)
1. REVIEW TARGET OUTCOME AND FINDINGS FROM PREVIOUS MAPS
Begin by reviewing the previous maps, especially the Current State and
Dependency Map, noting in particular the overall goal of the initiative
and the primary bottleneck in your current process. (5 mins.) Make a

-- 187 of 353 --

copy of the Current State Map to use as the new Future State Map. (See
Figure 8.5.)
FIGURE 8.5: Current State Map with Bottleneck Highlighted
2. IDENTIFY TARGETS FOR IMPROVEMENT
Review the eight wastes of Lean (DOWNTIME) for a reminder of the
many forms that waste can take. We’ve repeated a simplified form of that
list here for ease of reference:
1. Defects
2. Overproduction
3. Waiting
4. Non-utilized talent
5. Transport
6. Inventory
7. Motion
8. Extra processing
Review your dependency map and incorporate findings into your
future state design. Make note of any other areas on the map that seem
to be “low-hanging fruit” (i.e., areas where you could readily make

-- 188 of 353 --

improvements). Mark these as areas for improvement (kaizen bursts),
small continuous improvement efforts that could reduce delays, improve
quality, etc. (20 mins.) (See Figure 8.6.)
FIGURE 8.6: Future State Map with Improvement Areas Noted in Green
3. REDESIGN THE STREAM
Modify the parts of the map that constitute the bottleneck, removing
wait time where it seems possible to do so, replacing serial steps with
parallel steps where possible, preprocessing work to make a step faster,
and so forth. (20 mins.) (See Figure 8.7.)
FIGURE 8.7: Future State Map Reduced to Seven Serial Steps and One Parallel Step
4. MEASURE THE FUTURE STATE

-- 189 of 353 --

Estimate the waiting and cycle times for the (improved) future state
value stream. This sets the target timing the team aspires to. Focus on
what can be achieved in the next three to six months. (15 mins.) (See
Figure 8.8.)
FIGURE 8.8: Future State Map with Cycle Timings
Tips and Traps
• Before ending the mapping session, schedule a follow-up session to
review progress and map the next set of incremental
improvements.
• Don’t get bogged down in detailed discussions of improvements.
The goal here is to set a target. Details can get worked out once the
Flow Roadmap (Chapter 9) has established a timeline for the future
state.
• Don’t identify too many improvements (kaizen bursts). Three is
probably a good number for your first mapping initiative. The team
can take on more as they gain confidence.
• Consider a shorter improvement horizon, such as four to six weeks,
for your first Future State Map to ensure you follow up and check in

-- 190 of 353 --

on progress.
• Wait time is a key target for flow improvement. Depending on the
type of work, it may be difficult to greatly improve cycle time. But
wait time can almost always be reduced by improving handoffs
between teams and reducing the amount of work in progress.
• To reduce wait time in one step, you can consider adding more
people or resources to help, preprocessing the work to simplify the
effort required or simply increasing the team’s awareness of the
backlog. Sometimes just making a team more aware of the work
backlog at a particular point can ensure that work items get
processed more expeditiously.
• A common reason for a team being overloaded is excessive work in
progress (WIP). The only way to reduce the overall WIP is by setting
strict limits on when new work items can be accepted into the
stream. WIP limits hurt. No one wants to say “no” explicitly. But the
consequence of not setting such limits is that we say “no” implicitly
to all tasks by dragging them out.
• A key motto for limiting WIP is David Anderson’s “Stop starting
and start finishing,”2 highlighting the importance of completing
tasks over initiating new ones.
• The Future State Map allows you the opportunity to set near-term
goals. This ties in well to objectives and key results (OKRs) or other
company goal-setting strategies. You should expect to iterate on
this Future State Map every few months, using it as a target for
planned value stream improvements.
Riffs and Variations
• Precede this mapping session with an Ideal State Mapping session.
The Ideal State Map depicts the theoretical smoothest and fastest
path to delivering value and represents the goal that each Future

-- 191 of 353 --

State Mapping exercise moves toward. Ideal State Mapping gives a
team the chance to really use their imagination and aim to
revolutionize the value stream.
• Ideal and Future State Mapping can also enable discontinuous
improvement, as mentioned earlier. There’s an opportunity to not
only incrementally improve but to reimagine, revolutionize, and
redesign the value stream if conditions like buy-in, support, and
capability allow. Team Topologies and Wardley mapping can all
facilitate this larger-scale reinvention. We’ll explain more about
making bigger organizational changes in Part 3.
CASE STUDY
Aligning Value Stream Stakeholders in Travel Tech
A global travel tech provider received a huge “aha” moment and a key learning from
collaborative Value Stream Mapping. This client was mapping a partner integration
workflow to improve throughput. They aimed to build integrations with every major travel
platform. But it’s hard to work through that list when your lead time is eight months and the
queue is fifty partners deep!
The mapping effort included participants from across the value stream. The mapping
revealed that 50% of the value stream was spent waiting because of poor information flow
and handoffs. We created a Future State Map that reduced the lead time to an expected
three months with minimal improvement efforts. But the immediate achievement appeared
at the very end of the first workshop: An individual from marketing, downstream of
everything else in the stream and often surprised by work dropped in their lap, remarked,
“This is the first time we’ve ever been in the same room together!”

-- 192 of 353 --

TABLE 8.1: Results of Mapping at a Travel Tech Company
Baseline Flow Optimized Flow
23 steps 6 steps (including parallel steps)
12 stakeholders 2 stakeholders
12 contributors 4 contributors
8 months 3 months
11 meeting stages Meetings replaced with decision automation, ownership,
collaboration, and coworking
9 call/email steps Automated weekly customer touch points; relationship calls vs.
status calls
9 embedded
subprocesses 3 embedded subprocesses
Beyond that alignment boost, the performance boost was even more surprising. Within
an afternoon of mapping, we uncovered a massive opportunity to improve flow across
partner integration. Fully loaded cost savings was $150,000 per year over three years.
Opportunity cost saved: three additional partner integrations a year over three years,
representing a $720,000 opportunity
Conclusion
Future State Mapping sets the target for improvement, particularly for
enabling flow. From a cybernetic perspective, we use it as a navigational
aid to direct us from the current state of a stream to a desired future
state, using this Future State Map as the target condition. As with
navigation, the bigger challenge is the incremental adjustment that is
required along the way. The next chapter introduces the Flow Roadmap,
a way to systematically sequence and prioritize desired improvements
that will bring the future state to life.

-- 193 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Future State Mapping builds on the previous maps to envision an achievable future
state target.
• This target is the first step in a high-level, cybernetic Improvement Kata.
• Future State Maps target the main hot spot or bottleneck in the Current State Map
and highlight multiple improvement opportunities (kaizen bursts).
OceanofPDF.com

-- 194 of 353 --

CHAPTER 9
The Flow Roadmap
“The ultimate purpose of taking data is to provide a
basis for action or a recommendation for action.”
W. EDWARDS DEMING
NOW THAT WE’VE EXPLORED the four main types of maps—Outcome, Value
Stream, Dependency, and Future State—we can take a closer look at the
Flow Roadmap. It’s common for organizations to create roadmaps to
help people inside and outside the organization get a sense of how they
intend to progress. Product companies will frequently maintain both a
Product Roadmap (depicting intended improvements to the product)
and a Technical Roadmap (depicting intended improvements to their
technology infrastructure).
FIGURE 9.1: The Flow Roadmap Primarily Serves to Enable Flow

-- 195 of 353 --

The Flow Roadmap focuses on improvements to enable flow across
the value stream. The Flow Roadmap does not describe
what you will
create; it’s a plan for improving	
how you will create. Creativity and
innovation are as important to workflow as they are to products. The
Flow Roadmap is a plan for how to improve workflow.
What Is the Flow Roadmap?
Traditional roadmaps are useful communication and alignment tools to
help inform groups and individuals about what they can expect in the
future, but they don’t talk about how the future will happen. This “how”
is the gap that Flow Roadmaps fill. Flow Roadmaps plot actions,
experiments, and mechanisms to improve the way you deliver your
initiatives, features, and traditional roadmap items.
There are three stages to Flow Roadmapping, illustrated in Figure
9.2:
1. Identify improvement opportunities.
2. Prioritize each activity.
3. Sequence activities into a roadmap.
FIGURE 9.2: The Three Stages of a Flow Roadmap

-- 196 of 353 --

Why Flow Roadmapping Works
Flow Roadmapping allows you to navigate to your target destination
based on the three elements of action—value, clarity, and flow. It brings
four specific benefits:
• Transforms insights into action. The Flow Roadmap is the
culmination of the previous maps. The prior mapping exercises
clarify the value the team is seeking to achieve and offer clarity into
the flow, the primary constraints, and what the future could look
like. The Flow Roadmap grounds those insights into a practical
sequence of next actions.
• Prioritizes activities by importance and feasibility. The fast,
visual organization of possible actions into importance and
feasibility allows us to identify what actions are the most promising
next steps and which we can safely defer. Setting priorities enables
us to deal with tasks sequentially rather than taking on parallel
work in progress.
» Importance: Relative value considering the target outcome.
Often substituted with impact.1
» Feasibility: How readily, easily, and capably the action could
be performed.
• Quantifies or qualifies progress. Setting specific, measurable
indications of progress ensures that we can validate that actions are
moving forward and having the desired effect.
• Assigns ownership. Assigning ownership provides clarity of
communication and accountability. This sets explicit expectations
for every team member involved.

-- 197 of 353 --

BOLT GLOBAL
Navigation Needs A Compass and A Map
Mapping is a great opportunity to identify value, build clarity, and visualize improved flow,
but that’s useless unless it’s made actionable. As we discussed in Part 1, improvement and
change is extremely difficult without an on-ramp. Sharon reflects on a caution she read in
Value Stream Mapping: “All too often we see organizations with beautifully designed
current state value stream maps but no future state value stream maps. Or beautifully
designed future state maps, but no action plan for realizing the future state.”2 Without
action, her return on time invested mapping and gathering insights would be compromised,
and she may not get another chance to gather everyone.
To get started, Sharon needs to transform the insights discovered during mapping into
actions. Reviewing the previous maps, Sharon collects the notes that highlighted the most
promising countermeasures to address the constraints preventing the team from delivering
twice as often. The team had determined environment setup and a dependency on the
infrastructure team to be the constraint. Through Dependency Mapping, they identified
several issues that could significantly improve the performance of the value stream if
addressed. These issues were transformed into actions and experiments to improve
performance:
TABLE 9.1: Issues Transformed into Actions/Experiments to Improve Flow at Bolt Global
Issue Action/Experiment to Improve Performance
Often missing required
information.
→ Template for new requests (automate in the
future).
Manual email ticket intake. → Submit requests via forms into the task
management system.
Insufficient number of available
environments.
→ Consider alternate options. [TBD]
Team over capacity and
constrained.
→ Sharon’s team has a contributor who can augment
Karl’s team capacity.

-- 198 of 353 --

Since Sharon’s team can’t do everything at once, these actions needed to be prioritized.
To keep that quick and minimal, Sharon focused on two dimensions: (1) importance (to
capture relative value) and (2) feasibility (to capture how readily the action could be
performed). This provided a natural distribution that created tiers of actions. The most
feasible and important are natural starting points; other improvements could wait.
Based on the clarity from this exercise, the team was able to distribute these actions over
time to minimize work in progress (WIP). They could also address dependencies across
actions by ensuring that paired dependencies were addressed at the same time and
sequential dependencies were addressed in sequence.
Most roadmaps stop there, but experience taught Sharon a few things that pushed her to
clarify further. She’d been in too many retrospectives where ideas surfaced and were never
acted on, there were plans for next steps with no clear targets, and efforts existed without
an owner.
Adding measures of progress to actions made it clear how the team would evaluate the
impact of the actions, and adding ownership to each action made it clear who would drive
the action forward. Figure 9.3 shows the Bolt Global team’s completed Flow Roadmap,
incorporating the kaizen-driven actions and supporting detail.
FIGURE 9.3: Sharon’s Completed Flow Roadmap
The completed Flow Roadmap shows actions across three time horizons, measures
of progress, and ownership of next steps.

-- 199 of 353 --

Sharon’s team drew up the Flow Roadmap and shared it with Karl and other peers as
well, as product leadership, to enable better communication and collaboration. Confidence,
trust, alignment, and engagement went up, and lead time began to go down. The roadmap
continued to be a living document that both teams referenced and built upon over the
following months to stay clear, aligned, and moving forward effectively.
How to Create a Flow Roadmap
After mapping outcomes, value streams, dependencies, and future state,
you have incredible insights into how to transform your workflow and
improve performance. To move from insights to action, the Flow
Roadmap is the key to unlocking your first steps.
Below is the step-by-step process. You can follow the instructions to
the letter, pare it down to something faster and less detailed, or dig as
deep as you like. Just like with the rest of Flow Engineering, you decide
what level of detail and time is most appropriate. Just remember, you
may miss something going too fast, and you may waste time going too
deep—but the great thing is, you can adjust!
Structuring Invitation
Invite stakeholders likely to be involved in next steps. Revisit the target
outcome and express the need to define actions for next steps. You’ve
uncovered and clarified opportunities—now it’s time to act on them. The
group maps a path to addressing these key questions:
• What are the highest-priority actions to deliver our target
outcome?
• How will we measure progress?
• Who will own the progress?
How Space Is Arranged and Materials Needed

-- 200 of 353 --

Use a digital collaboration tool or an actual dry-erase board/paper and
sticky notes. The finished map will look like Figure 9.4. It has three main
sections. In the upper left, we include a copy of the Future State Map, the
main source for improvement items gathered in Stage 1. In the lower left,
we create space for the prioritization exercises done in Stage 2. And in
the lower right, we build the actual Flow Roadmap, the linear list of next
actions to be generated in Stage 3.
FIGURE 9.4: The Flow Roadmap Board
How Participation Is Distributed
• Bring up to ten representatives with deep knowledge of the insights
uncovered by previous maps.
• Everyone participates according to their knowledge of
opportunities and potential countermeasures.
How Groups Are Configured

-- 201 of 353 --

• One main notetaker builds the Flow Roadmap on a shared board.
• Other contributors discuss to add, remove, or amend aspects of
that shared map.
Sequence of Steps and Time Allocation
1. IDENTIFY IMPROVEMENT ACTIVITIES
The first stage is conducted in the upper section of the workspace. List
the target improvement areas (kaizen bursts) identified while working on
the Future State Map. Figure 9.5 on page 152 shows the diagram created
in step three of Future State Mapping. (See Chapter 8.) To realize that
intended future state, various changes are required, which are shown as
green sticky notes. There may also have been other improvement areas
identified in the Value Stream Mapping and Dependency Mapping
exercises. All of these improvement areas are candidates for inclusion in
the Flow Roadmap.

-- 202 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.5: The Future State Map Showing Improvement Areas
The Future State Map generated in Chapter 8 forms the basis for Flow
Roadmapping. The blue sticky notes depict the intended future steps, while the
green sticky notes represent areas where change is required to achieve that future
state.
Next, separate the improvement suggestions to begin identifying
next steps, as seen in Figure 9.6. If these improvement areas are not clear
or small enough to act on, you can break them down further. For each
improvement area, identify specific actions that would be required to
implement the improvement. Place these actions below the
corresponding improvement area.

-- 203 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.6: Improvement Opportunities Broken Down into Actions
2. PRIORITIZE EACH ACTIVITY
Move to the second section of the board, as outlined in Figure 9.4. This is
where you will conduct the prioritization of each activity. Work together
as a group to plot the importance of each improvement by creating a
ranking column to the right of the actions created in the prior step. (See
Figure 9.7.) Each possible improvement is ranked on the vertical axis in
order of importance by asking, “How critical is this to realizing our target
outcome?”

-- 204 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.7: Possible Improvements Ranked by Importance
Now, plot the feasibility of each action by moving each improvement
idea along the horizontal axis based on how feasible it is, as shown in
Figure 9.8 (see page 154). For each item, ask, “How easily can we
accomplish this?”
These four criteria can help you determine feasibility:
1. Activities that require multiple contributors are less feasible than
those that require a single contributor.
2. Activities for which we currently lack a capability are less feasible
than those for which we currently have the capability.
3. Activities with dependencies on other teams are less feasible than
those that depend only on this team.
4. Activities with unknown scope are less feasible than those with
known scope.

-- 205 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.8: Plot Feasibility along the Horizontal Axis
Next, indicate dependencies between items, as shown in Figure 9.9.
When delivery of one item depends on delivery of another item, we
depict that relationship on the diagram. For example, in Figure 9.9, Item
3 depends on Item 2 and Item 6 depends on Item 7.

-- 206 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.9: Indicate Dependencies between Activities
Now, divide the improvement suggestions (plotted by importance
and feasibility) into now, next, and later based on their distance from the
upper-right corner. (See Figure 9.10.) We have color-coded the items to
show which ones fit into which category.

-- 207 of 353 --

FIGURE 9.10: Improvement Activities Categorized by Time Horizon (Now, Next, Later)
Now is in yellow, next is in blue, and later is in pink.
3. SEQUENCE ACTIVITIES INTO A ROADMAP
We now begin generating the actual Flow Roadmap. Move to the third
section of the workspace, as illustrated in Figure 9.4.
Copy items from the previous step and arrange them in sequential
order by now, next, and later, taking into consideration the
dependencies between items, as seen in Figure 9.11.
FIGURE 9.11: Items Arranged in Sequential Order: Now, Next, Later
For example, since Item 4 was high in both importance and feasibility
but had no dependencies, you should do that first. Item 3 was also high

-- 208 of 353 --

in importance and feasibility but depended on Item 2. So the next
priority items are Item 2 and then Item 3.
Next, identify measures of progress for the “Now” items. Below these
items, add another sticky note to indicate one or more measures of
progress, as shown in Figure 9.12 (see next page).
FIGURE 9.12: Identified Measure of Progress

-- 209 of 353 --

Example Measures of Progress
It can be challenging to choose an appropriate measure to evaluate progress, but the
simplest guideline can be summed up as, “How will you know you’re making
progress?” This is not only critical to ensure you’re heading in the right direction at
the rate you expect, but it’s also vitally important to effective communication with
peers, stakeholders, and contributors. A good reference of useful measurements has
been collected by Gartner and represented in Table 9.2.
TABLE 9.2: Gartner’s Flow Metrics Cover Technical, Product, and Business Concerns
Technical Product Business
Code change size Lead time Product cost
Code delivery speed Cycle time Product value
Code refactoring rate Throughput Return on investment
Code review churn Work in progress Product quality
Code quality Flow efficiency* Net Promoter Score
Technical debt Work item profile** Customer satisfaction
* The percentage of lead time an item is actively being worked on (total cycle
time/total lead time).
** Also referred to as Flow Distribution3 and includes features, defects, debt,
and risk but can also include experiments or specific subtypes like rework.
Source: Gartner, “Analyze Value Stream Metrics to Optimize DevOps
Delivery,” August 2020.
Other valuable metrics to consider in the context of value stream performance
include the following:
• feature adoption and usage
• deployment/release frequency
• change failure rate/escaped defects

-- 210 of 353 --

• mean time to recovery (MTTR)
• Andon pulls (calling out blockers and issues in flow)
• contributor/stakeholder satisfaction
Metrics are not the only measurements to consider. You can just as easily use
milestones to establish a progress marker (for example, completing an experiment,
completing a survey, establishing a liaison for a dependency, or implementing a
change that facilitates a larger action).
Measurements are key aspects of a cybernetic control system. The choice of
metrics is a strategic decision. Measuring too much can waste energy; measuring too
little can leave you unable to see. Measures will affect behavior and can be gamed.
Evaluate them in the light of your target outcome to protect against the risk of
measurement myopia.
Next, below the measures of progress, assign owners for those
actions based on the skills and capacity of your team. Add another row of
sticky notes beneath the “progress measures” to identify the owners, as
shown in Figure 9.13.
FIGURE 9.13: Example of Adding Assigned Owners
Tips and Traps
• In general, teams should focus mostly on items in the “Now”
category, but if your team has the capacity, feel free to expand your
efforts into the “Next” and “Later” time horizons. However, it is

-- 211 of 353 --

essential to recognize that the further into the future we plan, the
less predictability we have.
• Earlier iterations of Flow Roadmaps included “methods of
progress” rather than owners. This was intended to drive further
clarity on the “how” for continuous improvement, informed by
systems like V2MOM and conversations with thought leaders like
Mike Burrows. Mike called out the idea of “Measure before
Method,”4 which informed the initial design of the map, but at this
stage, method is less important than who might lead the effort.
Have someone take the lead and let them figure out the details of
how.
Riffs and Variations
• Feel free to use any alternative approach to roadmapping or
planning out next steps. Identifying measures of progress and
assigning ownership are valuable to make progress visible and
accountability clear, but the important thing is taking action and
not taking on too much. Other dimensions to consider include
anticipated obstacles and chosen methods.
• Roadmap items can be themed and/or organized to align to
objectives and key results (OKRs) or other large-scale initiatives.
Color coding items to themes like “information and data visibility”
or “improved capability” can help connect the dots from your
efforts back to high level initiatives.
• At this stage, it can be valuable to perform a retrospective or follow
up with a survey to capture learning and improve future efforts.
• John Cutler has collected and shared a large library of valuable
roadmapping and prioritization guidance in his blog articles. He
has also collected a library of practices like “The Magic

-- 212 of 353 --

Prioritization Trick,”5 which provides an alternative step-by-step
method for arriving at a “Now, Next, Later” roadmap.
CASE STUDY
Moving from Insights to Action in a Large Procurement
Organization
A large Fortune 500 software organization ran a Flow Engineering program with the aim to
increase flow and value output across their procurement defect resolution flow. Participants
included the heads of delivery, engineering, program management, architecture, product
management, and infrastructure. Their vision for the past several years had been to improve
developer productivity.
Years before, they’d laid out a “what” roadmap to optimize performance and efficiency
through technical changes and automation. But it hadn’t paid off in lead time or customer or
contributor satisfaction. Value Stream and Dependency Mapping revealed that while all the
previous performance improvements had focused on the middle stages where automation
was closest to developers, huge delays and friction lay both upstream and downstream
beyond their automation efforts (upstream in support analysis, investigation, and
reproduction and downstream in test environment verification and full release regression).
There were weeks of delay and weeks of activity with little value-added time. The
percentage of active time across the two hot spots was only 5%. Visibility into the problem
areas led to a clear deconstruction of the dependencies connected to the hot spots and
identifying countermeasures across two major themes: (1) information and data visibility
and (2) key capabilities. The group realized they lacked critical information to effectively act
on defects and to manage the flow of those defects. They also lacked critical capabilities to
act on insights they discovered. The actions and experiments to address these gaps
included efforts to distinguish standard from nonstandard work, build interfaces with
dependent teams, and implement passive monitoring of test environment state and usage.
Progress indicators don’t have to be metrics. Because the team lacked visibility and clear
ownership of these goals, their progress indicators were mostly the completion of
milestones toward their goal:
• In-app support (self-service) is scoped as a roadmap item.
• App dependency liaison assigned.
• Customer extensions and customizations categorized and scoped.

-- 213 of 353 --

• Top five most problematic customer use cases documented.
• List of “most customized” customers.
• Infrastructure state visibility scoped.
Each change above hit the sweet spot of important and feasible and lay the groundwork
for real progress toward their target outcome. There were also clear actions for future time
horizons to provide opportunities to pull improvements forward as the low-hanging fruit
was picked. Figure 9.14 shows the progression from challenges and ideas through
prioritization and plotting the final roadmap.
FIGURE 9.14: Flow Roadmap Creation Progressing from Problem Areas and Concerns to
Actions
The team progressed from a state of disorientation and frustration over past efforts that
didn’t seem to improve key measures to a state of clarity and alignment on actions
connected directly to their most critical hot spots.
Conclusion

-- 214 of 353 --

Creating a Flow Roadmap directly supports any other roadmaps you
maintain, such as Product and Technical Roadmaps. The Flow Roadmap
is a plan for a team to improve its capacity. By improving flow, we’re
improving delivery performance, allowing all of our work to be
completed faster and at a higher quality.
This approach allows for relatively quick prioritization and
estimation. As with the other maps, the goal is not to define a perfectly
detailed plan. Instead, the goal is to provide just enough clarity to take
your next action (and then the next and the next) with confidence and
alignment.
With clear definition and priority of action, it’s easier to create a
roadmap you can feel confident in and that can impress even the most
skeptical executive. The roadmap also provides a shared vision that every
individual contributor can use to navigate in the right direction.
Flow Engineering is about finding the fastest path to effective action.
From within all possible goals, Outcome Mapping establishes which will
have the greatest value. From within parts of their workflow, Value
Stream Mapping and Dependency Mapping provide clarity on the one
constraint that has the most impact. And from within all possible
activities, Future State Mapping and Flow Roadmapping focus the team
on what changes will unlock flow. This is a powerful way to achieve
target outcomes and also prevents disengagement, disorientation, and
distraction.
Focus is important, but in large organizations, we also need to scale
up, scale out, and sustain our improvement efforts. In Part 3, we’ll look at
ways you can use cybernetic principles to amplify the impact of Flow
Engineering and leverage additional techniques to address enterprise
scale and complexity.

-- 215 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Insights from Flow Engineering workshops can be plotted and prioritized to create
a clear and actionable roadmap, the Flow Roadmap.
• The Flow Roadmap complements other planning documents, such as Product and
Technical Roadmaps, by focusing on improving flow—how work gets done.
• The Flow Roadmap captures actions, measurements, and ownership across
increasing time horizons.
• The Flow Roadmap is a clear artifact that can be shared with leadership, peers, and
individual contributors.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 216 of 353 --

PART 3
Navigating the Landscape
OceanofPDF.com

-- 217 of 353 --

CHAPTER 10
Principles of Flow Engineering
“As to methods, there may be a million and then some,
but principles are few. Those who grasp principles can
successfully select their own methods.”
HARRINGTON EMERSON
HAVING CHARTED A COURSE from your current state to a target state, we’ll
now offer guidance on taking that journey and on enabling flow over
larger scales and longer time frames.
We’ve spoken throughout this book of the need to move to effective
action by targeting valuable outcomes, clarifying the path to progress,
and steadily navigating toward improved flow. Taking the helm and
guiding teams through this Flow Engineering process is not complicated,
but it still requires courage and clarity.
We’ll begin by sharing a set of principles that can guide and inform
your efforts to engineer flow. Because instilling principles in an
organization requires inspiration, discipline, and mindfulness, Chapter
11 offers advice on how to lead a team in these ongoing flow
improvements. Chapter 12 shares common obstacles that often present
headwinds to teams and what you can do to avoid them. Chapter 13
shows how the mapping exercises of Flow Engineering culminate in
Value Stream Management, the ongoing practice of tuning performance

-- 218 of 353 --

based on these principles. Finally, Chapter 14 shows how to steadily
increase your influence beyond your team to the broader organization.
Progressing from your current state to a target state requires effective
action from the entire team. The most reliable way to scale performance
improvement across a team or organization is to train consistently in a
set of core principles.
The Power of Principles
Effective action depends on the ability of each individual to identify
value, build clarity, and enable flow. As mentioned in Chapter 2,
remedies to the challenge of scale fall on a continuum between
prescriptive and generative, with Flow Engineering aiming to facilitate a
balance between these two extremes.
These approaches emerge from two different ways of seeing an
organization: the prescriptive approach is based on the view that an
organization can be designed and engineered like a machine, while the
generative approach is based on the view that an organization is
composed of living workers whose behavior necessarily emerges from
their own values and understanding.
Both approaches are needed, specifically because an organization has
a dual nature: organizations are both a designed system and a living
system, as expressed by Fritjof Capra and Pier Luigi Luisi in
The Systems
View of Life.1 This dual nature leads to profoundly different
interpretations of what explains an organization’s difficulties and what
we can do to enable its success. The purpose of Flow Engineering is to
enable process transformation that is strategically oriented but also
authentically motivated. One of the most powerful ways to scale and
sustain this transformation is to teach simple and repeatable principles
that can be applied in many contexts.

-- 219 of 353 --

Principles are supremely valuable in the context of engineering flow
because they provide guidance to all people at all times. Principles guide
effective action not only for individuals but for large groups of people.
They are far more adaptive than any prescriptive method or playbook.
Principles are generalizations that can readily be applied to many
patterns. Just like collaborative mapping is a superpower for effective
collaboration, principles are a superpower for effective action.
In a cybernetic context, principles act as a decentralized, nonlinear,
and inside-out control system. They’re decentralized in that they can be
held in each individual’s mind and more easily recalled from passive
memory than a detailed playbook. They’re nonlinear in the sense that
they can be applied in various contexts to varying degrees and
simultaneously in different contexts by many individuals. And they’re an
inside-out control system in that they allow individuals to act
autonomously by following the same guidance, the same navigation
system.
Principles as Decision Filters
Decision filters are a tool used to streamline and improve the decision-
making process in various methodologies, particularly business and
project management. The core idea is to use a set of criteria or “filters”
through which decisions must pass before being made. The structure of
a decision filter is as follows: “Faced with a decision between X and Y, we
choose X over Y.” In this way, decision filters enshrine the values of an
organization and make them practical for daily decision-making.
An example would be the following guidance from Satya Nadella,
CEO of Microsoft: “If a developer ever has a choice between working on
a feature or developer productivity, they should always choose developer
productivity.”2 These filters help ensure that decisions align with
strategic goals, resource constraints, and other important factors. Two

-- 220 of 353 --

specific examples are valuable in the context of Flow Engineering: Agile
decision filters and Lean decision filters.
Agile Decision Filters: In Agile methodologies, decision filters
focus on flexibility, customer satisfaction, and iterative progress. The
Agile Manifesto laid out values as decision filters to serve as
guideposts at the crossroads of any decision.3 Decisions are evaluated
based on how well they adhere to Agile principles like “responding to
change over following a plan” and prioritizing “individuals and
interactions over processes and tools.” These filters help teams stay
aligned with Agile values and ensure that decisions support an
iterative, adaptive approach to project management.
Lean Decision Filters: In Lean management, decision filters are
centered around principles like waste reduction, efficiency, and
delivering value to the customer. Decisions are assessed on their
ability to eliminate unnecessary steps, improve process efficiency,
and enhance value creation for the end user. Examples include “Value
trumps flow, flow trumps waste elimination,” as stated by David
Anderson.4 These filters guide teams and organizations to make
decisions that are in line with Lean thinking, focusing on
streamlining operations and maximizing customer value.
In both cases, the decision filters serve as a guiding framework,
helping teams and organizations make choices that are consistent with
their overall approach and goals. They act as a checkpoint, ensuring that
decisions contribute positively to the project or organization’s objectives.
Next, we’ll introduce the five principles of Flow Engineering.
The Five Principles to Guide Flow Engineering

-- 221 of 353 --

The principles shared here draw on multiple sources, but we’ve
organized them into the five principles of Lean first introduced by James
Womack and Daniel Jones in their book
Lean Thinking.5 Within these,
we’ve cited some relevant points from other well-known contributors to
the field, including Mary and Tom Poppendieck, W. Edwards Deming, Eli
Goldratt, Steve Spear, and Peter Senge. Many of these thinkers evolved
their ideas independently, but notwithstanding some nuanced
distinctions in their views, we feel comfortable presenting their views in
an integrated fashion here.
While there are many other principles that you might find valuable to
adopt, the following constitute a minimum set of instructions that
everyone in a team should become familiar with: specify value, map the
value stream, create flow, pull don’t push, and pursue perfection. (See
Figure 10.1.)
FIGURE 10.1: The Five Principles of Lean
1. Specify Value
The central importance of value was introduced in Part 1. Although the
term
value is commonplace, the paper “Measuring Value” describes its
complexity:
Value is subjective and volatile…Economists and accountants track and calculate
value using the same mathematics that physicists and engineers use to calculate
mass, distance, and energy. But value is fundamentally different from physical things.
Value is subjective and transitory because it is a measure of how positively we feel
about something, and whether it addresses a need.6

-- 222 of 353 --

The subjectivity and volatility of value is why value must be specified.
Value is always experienced by a particular being at a particular moment
in time. It is a positive feeling of appreciation. What a valuable product
brings is moments of enjoyment, relief, or effectiveness. In exchange,
committed customers will pay money, a transaction that, again, reflects a
momentary decision to part with something of value to receive
something of greater value. Revenue figures are a summary of conditions
and outcomes.
Representing the value of something in terms of dollars is a way of combining every
possible characteristic of a thing into a single dimension. This is similar to how a scale
reduces an object to the single dimension of weight. It tells you nothing about the
nuanced qualities, history, or potential of the object it’s weighing. A scale cannot
distinguish between a human being and several piled-up bags of rice. Since value is
not an intrinsic quality of things, any measurement of value is necessarily subjective
and subject to change.7
The subjectivity of value leads to an interesting challenge. Because
there are multiple parties involved in creating and consuming a product,
each of them exists in mutual dependence. Each party needs to
experience a net positive value for the relationship to be sustainable long
term. This is what mathematicians call “constrained optimization.”
Similar to game theory, this implies that the optimal solution is not an
absolute maximum for any one party. Where any one party’s interests are
optimized to the detriment of other parties, the system becomes
unbalanced, threatening the long-term relationship.
But it is precisely because value is subjective that this optimization
problem is solvable. Delivering value is an act of cooperation, not a zero-
sum game. The primary purpose of Outcome Mapping is to help all of
the participants develop a clear sense of the value of a particular
improvement opportunity. By enumerating the target outcome and

-- 223 of 353 --

benefits, the group has the opportunity to collectively understand the
larger goal.
A simple Outcome Map, organized into columns for outcome,
benefits, obstacles, and next steps, can still include a diverse set of
concerns. Figure 10.2 shows a standard Outcome Map with an analysis of
the purpose that each outcome and benefit serves.
FIGURE 10.2: A Simple Outcome Map Representing Diverse Concerns
Value is an emergent property. It is experienced by a particular
person at a moment in time. Value is enabled by a flow of work and
feedback. It’s relatively easy to measure work, but since value is
subjective, we can only measure value by getting feedback from those
experiencing it. Value should inform every decision, action, and
investment. Design for feedback to enable value.

-- 224 of 353 --

2. Map the Value Stream
The practice of Value Stream Mapping is central to Flow Engineering,
but why? A value stream is a system for producing benefit through a
sequential series of contributions. Since a value stream is an
interdependent system, it is greater than the sum of its parts.
When we focus attention on a problem, our minds naturally narrow
and fixate locally on that issue. This leads to a tendency to focus on the
parts rather than the whole, as illustrated by Iain McGilchrist’s	
The
Master and His Emissary.8 It’s also much easier to quantify and address
point improvements. We can find endless shortcomings in the particular
parts of a system, but unless improvements are targeting the constraint
in a system, they will not lead to a net improvement in throughput.
Every activity should align to a value stream. Our internal model of
work needs to be continually realigned to focus on the value we are
delivering. We experiment intentionally and unintentionally with many
activities, but we need to constantly rein in those that are not bringing
value. When every part of the value stream is aligned with this aim, the
flow is naturally improved because it eliminates steps that do not add
value.
W. Edwards Deming, Peter Senge, Mary Poppendieck, Stafford Beer,
and countless other thinkers of the twentieth century emphasized the
importance of understanding the organization as a system. Deming
identified system thinking as one of four topics in his System of
Profound Knowledge. Peter Senge identified systems thinking as the fifth
discipline required to create a learning organization in his eponymous
book
The Fifth Discipline. The series of activities that make up a system
work together to perform a function, such as achieving a business aim.
Deming’s theory of knowledge emphasized that managers must
understand the systems they oversee to manage effectively.
We make assumptions and use particular ways of thinking to
understand situations and resolve problems. Western rationalism has

-- 225 of 353 --

habituated most of us to very linear ways of thinking. Even the medium
that we use to express information can skew our thinking. If you
primarily use slides, this biases both the creator and the audience toward
very simple concepts that can be explained graphically one idea at a time.
If you principally use spreadsheets, you tend to assume that all
knowledge can be organized into linear matrices, where everything adds
up in a linear system. If you tend to use documents, you’ll again tend to
assume that a linear system expressed as text is enough to describe a
situation.
Deming pointed out that internal barriers between departments can
interrupt the flow of information and materials and thus disrupt
systems.9 His work suggests that organizations should foster
collaboration across departments and teams to improve overall flow.
Mapping the value stream (as with any mapping exercise) is a method
of communicating visually. (See Figure 10.3 for a simple example.) As
mentioned in the introduction, 30% of the human brain is dedicated
exclusively to visual processing.10 Likewise, Principle 7 of the Toyota Way
emphasizes the use of visual controls so that problems are not hidden.11
Simple visual indicators and summaries that can be expressed on a single
page are very powerful.
FIGURE 10.3: A Simple Flow Engineering Value Stream Map

-- 226 of 353 --

Visibility enables observability; observability enables clarity.
Observability means to infer the internal state of something by
measuring its external characteristics. This depends on visibility, as well
as contextual information. The ability to infer something’s internal state
is the source for generating clarity, an adequate explanatory model.
Clarity is the most valuable resource we can influence. Our ability to
respond correctly, and thus not waste time or energy, depends on clarity
about the most useful response. Effort invested in gaining clarity allows
us to avoid waste and risk.
3. Create Flow
Principles 2, 3, and 4 of the Toyota Way are to create flow, avoid
overproduction, and level out the workload.12 These three are closely
related. Flow implies a quality of steadiness in motion; it implies that the
outflow is equal to the inflow over time. Overproduction implies that
valuable time, energy, and resources have been expended in producing
things whose value is not being realized. This is the very definition of
waste. Avoiding such waste requires leveling out the workload, also
known as
heijunka. A level workload creates consistency across time and
across the stream, again implying that the rate of inflow remains roughly
equal to the rate of outflow. This implies that overproduction is not
happening, even temporarily or at substages of production.
Continuous process flow brings problems to the surface. The
difficulty of achieving such steady flow reveals where there are parts of
the process that are subject to stagnation, overproduction, or
unevenness. To remedy this, organizations need to move materials and
information fast and link processes and people together.
Figure 10.4 shows a Value Stream Map with wait times between each
stage highlighted. In this case, the wait time represents ~80% of the total
lead time (131 of 168 days). The long waiting periods between steps are
the opposite of flow. The reason for the wait between stages is typically

-- 227 of 353 --

because the teams responsible for the next stage of work are not
available to begin working immediately, usually because they are already
busy with other work.
FIGURE 10.4: Value Stream Map Highlighting Wait Times
Optimizing for flow is contradictory to optimizing for resource
utilization. The book	
This is Lean described this as “the efficiency
paradox.”13 Keeping each machine, person, or process maximally utilized
seems like it is more efficient; this is called “resource efficiency.” But this
is only true if you consider each of these resources as independent.
This takes us back to why systems thinking is fundamental to this
process. Russell Ackoff summarized this dynamic of interdependence as,
“A system is never the sum of its parts; it’s the product of their
interaction.”14 Every part of the system consumes value as it works, but
the entire system needs to work in harmony to
produce value. Thus,
every system operates at a loss unless it is well-coordinated enough to
produce more value than it consumes.
To maximize value, we must instead focus on “flow efficiency.”
Resource efficiency isolates each contributor to assess the percent of
time it’s working divided by the time it is available. By contrast, flow

-- 228 of 353 --

efficiency measures how quickly each work product
could be produced
(cycle time) divided by the actual lead time. Both approaches superficially
seem to make the best use of resources, but optimizing for resource
efficiency by staying busy all the time undermines the production of
value by leading to a dramatic increase in lead time and work in progress.
(The math behind this is based on the Kingsman’s Approximation.)
We have deeply ingrained habits of assuming that we should
maximize the use of all capacity. But a system is more than the sum of its
parts. The root of the challenge lies in how variable the work is. If there
is little or no variability in how long a work step takes (as would be the
case with purely operational value streams like in manufacturing), each
resource can move closer to 100% utilization. But if there is significant
variation in how long work takes (as is the case with more developmental
value streams like software development or design), resources need slack
capacity to be able to accommodate this variation. If everyone is
maximally busy, there’s little extra time or energy to address new
challenges, and overall wait time tends to go way up.15 Utilizing a
resource 100% appears to maximize its individual productivity but at the
expense of making it impossible to deal with variation.
This is Lean
summarized this using the concept of an Efficiency Matrix, as shown in
Figure 10.5.

-- 229 of 353 --

FIGURE 10.5: The Efficiency Matrix
The trade-off between resource efficiency and flow efficiency leads to an Efficient
Frontier: a range of possible utilization options, shown as the dotted line in the
upper right. The greater the variation in the work, the more that Efficient Frontier is
pushed down.
Source: Modig and Åhlström,
This is Lean, 105.
Variation, thus, inhibits efficiency. It is for this reason that early
attempts at replicating the success of the Toyota Production System
emphasized reducing variation, as W. Edwards Deming illustrated in his
book
Out of the Crisis.16 For example, Six Sigma aims to reduce variation
and defects down to six standard deviations (σ - sigma) or 3.4 defects per
million units.17
The linear relationship between resource efficiency and flow
efficiency is also rarely linear. A linear relationship only holds true if
every stage in the process experiences the same amount of variation and
can process its work in the same period of time. In reality, there is
significant variation not only in work products but in how long different
stages of a process take to complete. Even in a manufacturing process,

-- 230 of 353 --

where variation can be systematically reduced, one stage of the process
will always take longer than other stages.
Eli Goldratt’s primary contribution to the world of management is
understanding that flow is always limited by one and only one constraint
at any given time. This is known as the Theory of Constraints (TOC) and
was the subject of his famous book	
The Goal.18 The Theory of
Constraints asserts that total system throughput can only be improved
when the constraint is improved. This constraint can come from culture,
process, environment, or technology. That factor is not necessarily
visible without the right observation. To increase performance, you need
to target the constraint.
According to Goldratt, addressing the constraint is done using five
focusing steps. These steps are a distillation of the TOC process for
improving flow and include:19
1. Identifying the constraint.
2. Exploiting the constraint.
3. Subordinating everything else to it.
4. Elevating the constraint.
5. Preventing inertia from setting in by repeating the process.
Value Stream Mapping lets us visualize workflow as a horizontal
progression. By examining the full end-to-end workflow, we can discover
a governing constraint that is limiting overall performance. The most
impactful governing constraint will always be at one point along that
workflow. (See Figure 10.6.) To address it, we can zoom in on what’s
happening within (or upstream o) the constrained activity by using
Dependency Mapping. We may also need to zoom out to address
external dependencies and capabilities contributing to the limitation.
Addressing the vertical slice that is acting as a governing constraint to
the overall horizontal flow is the key to improving performance.

-- 231 of 353 --

FIGURE 10.6: Theory of Constraints Step 1: Identify the Constraint
Next we exploit the constraint by extracting as much value from it as
possible—for example, by improving the utilization of that
one resource.
(See Figure 10.7.)
FIGURE 10.7: Theory of Constraints Step 2: Exploit the Constraint
The third step is to subordinate everything else to the constraint.
This can involve organizing to reduce wait times before or after that step
to avoid pileups or involve ensuring upstream quality and reliability. The
resource utilization can be tuned up or down to best support the
constraint. (See Figure 10.8.)

-- 232 of 353 --

FIGURE 10.8: Theory of Constraints Step 3: Subordinate Everything Else to the Constraint
The fourth focusing step in the Theory of Constraints is to elevate
the constraint. Having organized around the constraint, if more
throughput is required, the remaining option is to increase the capacity
of the constraint itself—e.g., by adding an additional parallel resource.
(See Figure 10.9.)
FIGURE 10.9: Theory of Constraints Step 4: Elevate the Constraint
4. Pull Don’t Push
The way to avoid overproduction is to use
pull systems instead of
push
systems. This means to give customers what they want, when they want
it, and in the amount they want. Not more.
A simple linear flow is sufficient to manage the simplest assembly
line, one which produces consistently day after day. But even one
variable is enough to destabilize this process. And customer demand is
always variable. This is why a pull system is so powerful. It allows the

-- 233 of 353 --

whole production system to synchronize to the pace of customer
demand and avoid overproduction.
Steve Spear’s book	
The High-Velocity Edge: How Market Leaders
Leverage Operational Excellence to Beat the Competition lays out a set
of principles as “the ideal” that summarizes a great deal of the value of a
pull-based system across a number of dimensions. As he stated,
This ideal implied that production and delivery should be:
• Defect-free—never compromising customer satisfaction.
• On demand—only in response to real need.
• One piece at a time—providing those who needed something exactly what they could
put to use, not overburdening them with the obligation to hold things in anticipation
of future need.
• Immediate—providing those who needed something what they needed without
imposing any wait time on them, but, if this was impossible, small batches of finished
goods might be kept on hand to provide the illusion of immediacy.
• Without waste—never spending time, effort, creativity, and other efforts in ways that
wouldn’t be valued by someone else.
• Safe—so no one gets hurt physically or emotionally or is professionally threatened.
• Secure—so that material, services, or information go only to those intended and not
others.20
The ideal described above illustrates how pull has significant
implications for value, clarity, and flow. Push is always a guess of what
may be needed in the future; pull is only ever driven by established need
(value). Pushing implies a lack of clarity on the need for our work,
leading to the assumption that we should produce, even if there is no
demand; pull creates a direct connection between what is needed and
what is delivered. Creating a pull-based system of work is an
extraordinary feat, but each step toward it brings improved value, clarity,
and flow.
Pull manifests itself in different ways within an organization, but let’s
look at a few ways it can apply to individual contributors and dependent

-- 234 of 353 --

teams:
• As an individual contributor, if I can pull work, information, or
capabilities (access on demand), I can do what I need when I need
to and avoid delays or capacity overload (too little or too much
work) at any given time. Rather than having a batch of committed
work to complete (that could be accomplished by others or grow
stale waiting for my attention), I can pull one task at a time, as I
have the capacity to act on it. Rather than having a testing
environment sitting idle and waiting for use, I can spin up or
reserve capacity on an on-demand or shared pool of dynamic
resources. If I can pull information and capabilities from other
teams via self-service (by referencing shared documentation) or
from an information radiator (like a dashboard), I don’t have to
interrupt that other team; I can simply pull without disruption or
distraction.
• Meetings are often employed as a way to broadcast information
that is valuable to the recipients, but meetings often consist of
much low-value information (noise) and little high-value
information (signal). The disengagement and distraction endemic
to businesses operating at scale often implies that attendees are not
mentally present, even if they attend. The signal is often worth the
noise, so the waste of pushing out information is preferable to the
risk of failing to convey the information. A pull-based equivalent
implies that the information should be made available in a shared
system and pulled by recipients as needed.
• For dependent teams, like shared services teams, every pull (every
request for assistance) represents a disruption unless it gets
buffered in a queue. The queue creates a delay, which impacts lead
time. By implementing mechanisms like prioritization and triage
(where different types of requests are routed differently and with

-- 235 of 353 --

varying urgency), we can more easily mitigate the costs of queuing
(delay) and leverage the benefits (buffering). By implementing self-
service capabilities, or even something as simple as a team API (a
specification defining information about the team, its capabilities,
and responsibilities—which we’ll discuss later on in the chapter),
we can allow those dependent on us to get what they need when
they need it without interruption or delay.
By their nature of being minimal, engaged on-demand, and value-
centric, pull-based systems are highly efficient and effective. They
maximize value, clarity, and flow but also increase visibility and
measurability. If we can measure the time between a need surfaced and a
need fulfilled, we can understand and improve our speed of action,
learning, and adaptation. The more we rely on push as a model for
action, the more risk, waste, delay, assumption, and load we inject into
the flow. Pull allows for just-in-time, just enough, and just the right
people.
A pull-based system is a powerful way of reducing batch size, as
shown in Figure 10.10. Reducing batch sizes reduces the amount of
inventory (including work in progress, or WIP) in the system. It also
allows the system to become more flexible and responsive, improving
flow and decreasing the time products spend in process. In addition,
reducing batch sizes lowers detrimental cognitive load. For example, if a
production failure occurs due to a large batch of changes, it is difficult to
discern which specific change caused the failure. Small batch
deployments reduce the risk and pinpoint the source of failures.

-- 236 of 353 --

FIGURE 10.10: Excess Work in Progress Is a Sign of Lacking Pull Systems
We mentioned WIP limits in Chapter 8 under Tips and Traps for
Future State Mapping. WIP limits are a classic example of a governing
constraint. Counterintuitively, limiting WIP enables you to get more
done. Here’s why it works:
• Improved communication and collaboration: Limiting WIP
means the team’s attention is less fragmented across disparate work
items, leading to more cohesive and collaborative work.
• Easier identification of bottlenecks: With fewer concurrent
tasks, bottlenecks in the workflow become more visible and easier
to address.
• Easier prioritization: WIP limits compel teams to focus on the
most critical tasks first, aligning efforts with key project goals.
• More effective planning: Limiting WIP leads to more predictable
workflows, allowing for better planning and forecasting.
• Increased team morale: A more manageable workload from
limited WIP helps prevent burnout and boosts team morale.
• Enhanced flexibility and responsiveness: Reduced WIP
enables teams to quickly adapt to changes in requirements through
reduced exposure to prior commitments.

-- 237 of 353 --

• Reduced context switching: By focusing on fewer tasks at a
time, contributors experience less context switching, leading to
greater efficiency.
• Faster completion times: Limiting WIP results in quicker task
completion, accelerating overall project progress.
• Enhanced quality: A focus on fewer tasks at a time leads to
higher-quality outputs and fewer errors.
• Improved focus and productivity: Focusing on a limited
number of tasks to lower detrimental cognitive load and the risk of
distraction.
Single piece flow is the most extreme version of WIP limiting, where
only one work item is under development at any given stage in the flow
of work. It can be extremely challenging to implement and not often
feasible, but it provides an unparalleled level of simplicity, clarity, and
focus to work flowing through a value stream. When contributors aren’t
juggling work, they not only experience less detrimental cognitive load
and distraction, but there’s also less waste from context switching. In
single piece flow streams or segments, contributors will often “mob” and
work on the work item together simultaneously. This has the added
benefit of maximizing information flow across the team in real time, but
it can also help rapidly onboard new team members into unfamiliar work
without overwhelming them. Single piece flow is also supremely
measurable. If there’s not a large batch of work flowing through the
system at any given moment, each work item can be much more clearly
measured, and flow constraints become far more obvious within daily
work. It’s easy to miss a constraint when you can simply switch to
another task and forget about the blocker or delay.
5. Pursue Perfection

-- 238 of 353 --

In Lean, perfection is pursued by continuously removing waste. Directly
or indirectly, waste is a result of not understanding or being able to
deliver value in a more efficient way. Therefore, learning is central to
removing waste.
Implicit in enabling learning is a sense of psychological safety, as
emphasized by Amy Edmondson, Google’s Project Aristotle, Ron
Westrum, and others. One of Deming’s main exhortations was to drive
fear out of organizations and to empower employees.21 Deming
understood that fear was counterproductive in organizations.
Encouraging open communication and reporting of issues without fear
of reprisal is essential to identifying and addressing impediments to flow.
The most reliable approach to learning is taking a scientific approach.
In brief, the scientific method implies that we develop mental models
about the system we’re seeking to understand, use those mental models
to develop a hypothesis about that system, and then run tests that might
invalidate or affirm that hypothesis.
The most reliable tests involve changing just a single variable. This
implies creating a stable starting point from which we can make a single
change. Thus, it’s clear how scientific thinking depends on
standardization. Standards create stability. And that stability, in turn,
allows us to notice and make sense of differences that might be exposed
by running tests.
A second key aspect of the scientific method is the willingness to be
wrong. Being right and being wrong feel exactly the same. What feels
different is	
discovering that we are wrong. Thus, learning is error
correction for the mind, as alluded to by Kathryn Schulz in	
Being
Wrong.22 This is, by definition, uncomfortable. Thus, learning requires
patience, humility, and deliberately putting ourselves in situations where
we may discover our mistakes.
Most of our mental models are implicit, and we implicitly want them
to be true. Our confirmation bias organizes information into these

-- 239 of 353 --

mental models, simplifying the world by ignoring information that
doesn’t make sense to us. Learning implies letting go of our current
models.
This is the purpose behind the idea of “go and see,”
genchi genbutsu,
made popular in Lean. Going to the actual place where work is
happening allows us to both solicit reliable information and test our
hypotheses.
This scientific thinking should not be relegated to just a select few
members of the organization. It is something that should be applied
systematically by every person in the organization every day. The culture
of “stop the line,”
jidoka, means creating a culture of stopping to fix
problems on the spot. This means that the pursuit of quality is exercised
continually across the organization.
Conclusion
Mapping and creating a Flow Roadmap provides you a solid starting
point for improving flow along with specific interventions that address
the opportunities you uncover, but from that point on, your actions and
decisions need to be guided by clear thinking. The principles we’ve
collected and referenced in this chapter can not only help you navigate
your next steps effectively but also improve your mapping practice and
uncover new insights as you map and analyze performance.
In the next chapter, we’ll take that further, offering specific
leadership and control mechanisms that make it easy to do the right
thing—and hard to do the wrong thing.

-- 240 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Principles provide scalable, adaptable, and applicable guidance for making
decisions that drive effective action within and beyond the practices of Flow
Engineering.
• Principles support Flow Engineering by guiding what we do with the information we
gain from mapping.
• The Lean stages of specifying value, mapping the value stream, enabling flow and
pull, and pursuing perfection provide a valuable framework for key principles.
• Value, clarity, and flow are enabled by shared understanding and applying the
principles of Flow Engineering.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 241 of 353 --

CHAPTER 11
Leading Flow Engineering
“The ultimate test of practical leadership is the
realization of intended, real change that meets
people’s enduring needs.”
JAMES MACGREGOR BURNS
THE PRINCIPLES OF Flow Engineering provide important guidance for
everyone involved in process improvement. But for principles to be
effective, they must be put into practice consistently. Consistent practice
requires discipline and mindfulness, and this, in turn, requires strong
and sustained effort. Strong and sustained effort, in turn, depends on
confidence that great results are possible. And confidence, in turn,
depends on inspiration and vision.
Changing a team’s values, understanding, and behavior is culture
change. A primary driver of successful culture change is what is known
as transformational leadership. This means to set forth an inspiring
vision of what the team is capable of, to encourage and exhort the team
in that direction, to provide steady and consistent reminders of the
principles, and to repeatedly redirect the team’s attention to the
outcomes they seek. In this chapter, we’ll look at how to lead Flow
Engineering efforts.
Cybernetics and Leadership

-- 242 of 353 --

The five maps you learned in Part 2 are designed to help teams take
effective action by fostering value, clarity, and flow. To understand
effective action at scale, we need to return to the concept of cybernetics.
If you’re an agent of change in your organization, you are responsible
for bringing that change about safely. To safely deliver change, you must
control risk. And to control risk, you need the ability to respond quickly
and effectively when problems emerge so that small problems don’t
derail the entire initiative.
Leadership just means influence, as John C. Maxwell stated in
The 21
Irrefutable Laws of Leadership.1 Leaders, by definition, do not exist
independently of those they lead. People follow the example, the
inspiration, and the words of leaders. Thus, leaders’ control of their own
body, speech, and mind indirectly exerts influence on the teams they
lead. We call this “leading from the inside out.”
The role of leadership is to assume the risk and responsibility of
guiding others safely in a beneficial direction in spite of great
uncertainty. Flow Engineering involves a special kind of leadership:
guiding teams to realize progressively greater personal and collective
capacity. Uncovering more and more of our team’s potential, rather than
just executing on known skills, involves significant uncertainty and
significant learning from everyone involved. To know whether we’re on
track, we must establish feedback loops.
Designing Feedback Loops
The cybernetic approach to leadership involves designing feedback loops
that can function as control systems. Control systems are methods to
allow one system to control or safely interact with another. Feedback
loops are an important aspect of any system. Negative feedback loops in
a control system help bring the system being controlled back into a safe
range. Positive feedback loops in a control system help encourage
desirable behavior.

-- 243 of 353 --

The simple Value Stream Map in Figure 11.1 depicts multiple feedback
loops and acts as a template for understanding the flow of work. The
macro feedback loop is defined by customer preferences, while micro
feedback loops within and between each stage of work are defined by
teams’ internal standards.
FIGURE 11.1: A Value Stream Map Depicts Multiple Feedback Loops
The cycle from customer request (1) to value delivered (2) establishes a system-
level positive feedback loop (3) that encourages growth and allows the team to
learn and tune performance. Internal feedback loops (4) are typically negative
feedback loops that allow for more fine-grained control and learning.
The purpose of an organization is to understand and respond to
customer preferences. This requires methods to solicit customer
sentiment (the macro feedback loop) since this is a leading indicator of
repeat sales and sustainable customer relationships. The feedback loops
between individual stages provide methods to control quality within the
process to avoid releasing defects to the customer.
Feedback loops must be correctly tuned to the problems they are
managing. Reacting to the wrong signal can be costly. Reacting
incorrectly can be wasteful. You can also drown in too much low-value
feedback. Your target must be clear and valuable, and you need
information that guides the flow of activity toward that outcome.
Feedback loops must also evolve as target outcomes evolve. Each

-- 244 of 353 --

objective has its unique key results, with specific metrics that provide
feedback on progress.
Feedback loops allow us to keep a system under control. Imagine if it
were difficult or impossible to control your body or your car. How
frightening, dangerous, embarrassing, and frustrating would this be?
Control is implicit in everything that we do, and the lack of control poses
many dangers. Control isn’t about robotic precision and repetition.
Dancers have control, and that control enables them to be creative. A
group of dancers synchronize and amplify their performance through
collective control.
The collaborative mapping exercises shared in this book are a way for
teams to gain control of their flow of work by building clarity. This
simple act of identifying collective value, building collective clarity, and
enabling collective flow aligns with the way living beings naturally bring
their worlds under control: through understanding and engaging with it.
Executing on the Flow Roadmap
As Peter Drucker famously quipped, “strategy is a commodity, execution
is an art.”2
Establishing a Flow Roadmap, or any other intended course of
progress, is a great start. But life moves fast, priorities change, things take
longer than planned, and we get distracted. Many great plans are set in
motion but are never accomplished. Here are some approaches to help
ensure that the momentum around flow doesn’t taper out.
Rhythm: Teams need daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual
rhythms that create opportunities to look back at past progress (or
lack of progress) to assess. The simple act of making a plan and
reviewing progress at intervals creates a feedback loop. The feedback
loop is a human one; our past self sets a reminder that our present
self now needs to act on, and our present self is setting reminders to

-- 245 of 353 --

help our future self stay on track. This habit is deeply ingrained in
some people and anathema for other people, but it is a habit that can
be established, and that is a basic requirement for building an
operational cadence at a team or organizational level.
Simplicity: The main failure mode of most improvement initiatives
is taking on too much. Our attachment to the idea of accomplishing
“all the things” means that we risk not accomplishing any of the
things:
Do one thing. Build confidence. Do the next thing. It’s for this
reason that we counsel people building a Flow Roadmap to target
just one improvement goal. If that’s easy for you and the team, great.
Take on more. But do it gradually.
Humility: Team learning implies that we do not already know
everything. Those who already know everything have nothing to
learn. Staying humble helps you stay open to new information, risks,
and opportunities.
Amplify Successes: Share progress and successes within the team
and with other teams. Process improvement is slow and subject to
setbacks, but sharing updates makes others more aware that small
improvements are something worth talking about and worth
celebrating. Also share failure in the context of learning. The
confidence to acknowledge the real state of affairs is an antidote to
the exaggerated positivity that some people and teams project as a
defensive shield.
Begin Again: The key skill for sustained progress is restarting an
initiative after it falters. It’s inevitable that improvement efforts will

-- 246 of 353 --

stall from time to time. Starting them back up again requires a
distinct determination.
Balancing Prescriptive and Generative Approaches
As mentioned in Chapter 2, there are many common templates for
managing business processes. These vary on a spectrum from
prescriptive to
generative. Some of the more common ones are shown in
Figure 11.2. The primary approach that we emphasize in this book is
Value Stream Management, bootstrapped and enabled by the maps
created through Flow Engineering.
FIGURE 11.2: Business Frameworks Are Templates for Management
Flow Engineering aims to balance prescriptive and generative
approaches. The sequence of maps and the steps within them is the
prescriptive aspect of Flow Engineering. It provides a structure that
orients teams toward goal-seeking behavior and continuous
optimization. It should be clear, repeatable, and relatively consistent,
though the outputs are always unique and tailored to each organization
and point in time. The informal interaction that unfolds during mapping
exercises is the generative aspect of Flow Engineering. We cannot predict
in advance what conversations and insights will unfold while others do

-- 247 of 353 --

these mapping exercises. The prompts and practices act to provoke a
response, and the response reflects the lived experience of participants.
This is why it is often said that the mapping is more important than
the map. The mapping is a living interaction that is shaped by and shapes
participants. The map is an artifact spun out from that living interaction.
The map may remain a useful conversation starter to provoke further
thought, but unless they’re referenced regularly over time, the maps
themselves have no power.
Governing and Enabling Constraints
To this point, we’ve used the term “constraint” to refer to the bottleneck
that restricts flow through a value stream (as in the Theory of
Constraints). But constraints are not always negative; they can be an
extremely valuable aid in crafting a system of work for optimal flow.
Dave Snowden, originator of the Cynefin framework, popularized a
twofold distinction between constraints: governing constraints and
enabling constraints.3
Governing constraints are those that limit or
control something;
enabling constraints are those which encourage or
make something possible.
The categorization into enabling constraints and governing
constraints is not a characteristic of the constraint itself; it’s a
description of how the constraint functions. The same constraint can be
both governing and enabling. For example, a ship’s sail is constrained by
the ropes that restrain it. That constraint governs the sail by preventing
it from moving too far out of the desired position. But the same
constraint also enables the sail to catch winds in a particular direction,
which, in turn, can enable movement.
Governing constraints restrict or guide certain types of thinking
or behavior; they are most applicable in a complicated domain where
solutions can be determined in advance. A constraint in a value

-- 248 of 353 --

stream that limits flow is a governing constraint. Such a constraint is
shown in Figure 11.3; it restricts the flow or quality of work
downstream, leading to decreased performance. Unblocking flow is
our primary target for rapid performance improvement. There can be
multiple negative impacts on flow, but there’s always one constraint
that has the greatest impact.
FIGURE 11.3: The Constraint on a Value Stream
This figure illustrates how a constraint has a distinct, measurable impact on the
flow of work on a value stream.
Enabling constraints are those that enable or encourage certain
types of behavior; they are most applicable in a complex domain
where new solutions are emergent. Generative approaches, often
seen in innovative and creative fields, are more about exploration and
discovery. They facilitate experimentation, adaptation, and learning.
Enabling constraints are designed to empower and enable action.
Unlike governing constraints, they don’t limit possibilities but rather
create a framework within which creativity and innovation can
flourish.
Prescriptive management systems emphasize creating governing
constraints by allowing or disallowing certain activities. Prescriptive
approaches involve setting specific rules, guidelines, and procedures that

-- 249 of 353 --

dictate how tasks should be performed. Governing constraints are akin
to these prescriptive rules. They are limits set to control and direct
behavior, ensuring adherence to standards, safety, legality, and other
essential factors. Governing constraints typically aim to make it hard to
do the wrong thing.
Generative management systems emphasize enabling constraints by,
for example, soliciting input from contributors to the question, “What
should be our main area of focus?” The question itself constrains
discussion, but it does so in a way that draws out insights from
participants. Enabling constraints might include basic guidelines,
principles, or values that provide a starting point or a foundation.
However, they leave ample room for individuals to explore various paths
and solutions. Enabling constraints typically aim to make it easy to do
the right thing.
Enabling and governing constraints make some things easy and other
things hard. To illustrate what this means in the context of flow, Table
11.1 provides several examples of each constraint type.
TABLE 11.1: Examples of Enabling and Governing Constraints
Enabling Governing
Maps/canvases
OKR/V2MOM structure
Technology platforms
Playbooks
Principles
Service level agreement
Industry regulation
Organizational structure and hierarchy
WIP limit
Security policies
Dave Mangot, author of	
DevOps Patterns for Private Equity,
illustrates the power of enabling constraints: “If we want teams that are
empowered to move quickly and safely, instead of giving them strict
instructions on how to perform their jobs, we can make the right way the

-- 250 of 353 --

easy way.”4 Enabling people to effectively and efficiently get to where
they want to go is sometimes described as “paving a path.”
Chris Matts provided further guidance for how to think about where
each constraint is best applied: “Where there is no uncertainty,
governing constraints are the most effective approach. Where there is no
uncertainty, use of enabling constraints is at best inefficient and at worst
destabilizing and destructive.”5 In a flow context, this means that in a
stable and consistent value stream, governing constraints can help
optimize and improve more effectively than enabling constraints. In a
chaotic or less established value stream, enabling constraints can help
encourage the right behaviors without becoming too onerous or
restrictive. This also implies that we can use constraints to improve
consistency (by restricting specific behaviors) or innovation (by enabling
specific behaviors). When enabling behavior, we aim to avoid premature
optimization (tightening up) while also avoiding a lack of guidance or
direction (aimless wandering).
Teaching and Coaching
Peter Senge’s 1990 book
The Fifth Discipline popularized the concept of
a learning organization. According to Senge, a learning organization is:
…an organization that has adopted learning as an integral element. It is the place
where people are constantly expanding their ability to achieve their goals, where new
models of thinking are being cultivated. Collective ambition is liberated and people
are constantly learning how to learn as members of an organization.6
In a world of continual change, such flexibility of mind is a critical
adaptive skill. Flow Engineering deals with the challenge of improving
value, clarity, and flow by changing how we feel, think, and act
individually and collectively. This makes work more meaningful and also
more manageable.

-- 251 of 353 --

Establishing a learning organization, Senge explained, depends on
establishing five disciplines: building shared vision, systems thinking,
mental models, personal mastery, and team learning.7 Three of these
principles have already been introduced in this book: building shared
vision is the primary goal of Outcome Mapping; systems thinking is
central to Value Stream Mapping and Dependency Mapping; and each of
the mapping exercises is a way of expressing and synchronizing our
mental models of work. We now offer some brief thoughts on Senge’s
remaining two principles: personal mastery and team learning.
Personal Mastery
There are two types of challenges: situations where you don’t know what
to do and situations where you know what to do but don’t want to do it.
Addressing the first challenge requires clarity: careful observation,
thought, discussion, and creativity. Addressing the second challenge
requires subordinating our innate experience of value—our feelings—to
what our conscious mind believes to be valuable. In other words,
discipline.
Discipline is the equivalent of mental weightlifting. Lifting weights
involves applying a physical force to counteract the force of gravity.
Discipline involves applying the mental force of conscious intention to
counteract the force of distraction and reactivity. The result of
continuously applying discipline is that patterns of behavior become
ingrained and natural, and thus require less effort to carry out. A
wonderful summary of the methods for developing personal habits can
be found in
Atomic Habits by James Clear, and insights into how to
cultivate talent in others can be found in
The Talent Code by Daniel
Coyle. A central point in both books is that the key lies in small,
continuous improvements compounded over time.
Coaching instills discipline in a team by giving them feedback.
Coaches hold a mental model of the target behavior. They observe the

-- 252 of 353 --

team, alert them to mistakes, give guidance, and praise progress. This is
an exercise in value, clarity, and flow on a moment-by-moment, day-by-
day basis. It makes the difference between success and failure over the
long term. Part 2 of this book offered creative exercises that help teams
craft a broad vision for progress. But just as navigating on an ocean
requires grit and determination, executing on the Flow Roadmap
requires patience and continuous effort.
One of the main qualities of a coach or leader is not being scared of
their own or others’ discomfort. Executing on a plan means
encountering confusion, setbacks, and distractions and persevering
anyway. This is not a comfortable undertaking, but it is a valuable one.
Team Learning and Potential
Earlier we described leadership as bravely entering the unknown. A key
unknown at play here is potential. To sustain confidence while drawing
out the potential of others requires sustained optimism and a vision of
what is possible. Such optimism has been repeatedly shown to be a self-
fulfilling prophecy. Work by Robert Rosenthal in the 1960s first
established how teachers who were led to believe their students were on
the verge of dramatic intellectual improvements helped those
improvements come about: “Expectations affect teachers’ moment-to-
moment interactions with the children they teach in a thousand almost
invisible ways. Teachers give the students that they expect to succeed
more time to answer questions, more specific feedback, and more
approval: They consistently touch, nod and smile at those kids more.”8
Adults are less malleable than children, but the same principles apply
to coaching adults. When we believe in the potential of our team, we
draw that potential out. This implies setting and maintaining high
standards while energetically giving targeted support and assistance with
building the habits students need.

-- 253 of 353 --

Both Outcome Mapping and Future State Mapping emphasize a
team’s potential state, turning attention to what could be. Implicit in
both of those maps is a team that is capable of carrying that out. As the
team adopts a valuable target outcome and envisions their future state of
performance, this vision also changes their self-identity. In becoming a
team that can accomplish that goal, they develop higher expectations of
themselves.
Team learning implies that teams develop shared understandings of
their operating environment and anchor that understanding in visual
artifacts such as the five maps of Flow Engineering. In this way, team
learning stabilizes individual learning, where each person’s
understanding supports the understanding of others on the team, and
behavioral expectations are clear from the standards around us.
By collaborating in creating the five maps, the entire team has a
chance to unify around process improvement. When, for example, teams
engage in Dependency Mapping to identify the causes of a particular
bottleneck, they build the full mental context (value and clarity) needed
to unblock the flow of work at that stage. If people are sincerely
motivated to improve a process, problem-solving behavior emerges
naturally.
For teams seeking process improvement, there is no substitute for
training and coaching the team in principles such as those explained in
Chapter 10. In
The Toyota Way to Lean Leadership, Jeffrey Liker and
Gary Convis observed, “It’s often said at Toyota that the best measure of
a leader’s success is what is accomplished by those they trained.”9 The
scale of modern enterprises presents enormous challenges that require a
combination of training, communication, and automation.
Closing Leadership Gaps

-- 254 of 353 --

It is important to clearly understand the qualities that leaders need to
effectively control risk in their organization. The 2021
EDA Trends in
Executive Development Report surveyed leaders from 1,030 medium and
large enterprises and identified the following key competencies for
effective leadership:10
• Leaders who understand the whole company and not just their
silos.
• Critical thinkers at every level.
• Increased communication and transparency.
• Ability to lead through change, change, and more change.
• Employees who are empowered to use their critical thinking skills.
• Companies who are genuinely committed to equity and inclusion.
The report also highlighted the following competency gaps in the
next generation of leaders:
• Ability to attract, develop, and retain the quality of talent needed to
achieve the business objectives.
• Ability to create a compelling vision and engage others around it.
• Ability to inspire others.
• Ability to deliver results or be results-oriented.
• Ability to manage the stress and demands of a real-time overloaded
leadership environment.
Flow Engineering offers a minimal, adaptable way to address and
satisfy these needs within and across teams. Outcome Mapping
facilitates the creation and sharing of a compelling vision that inspires
action. Mapping flow and measuring performance facilitates
understanding of the full system of work, critical thinking about
constraints, and empirical improvement. A Flow Roadmap turns insights

-- 255 of 353 --

into actions that deliver measurable results. As a collection of methods,
Flow Engineering includes, engages, and empowers talent to
communicate, collaborate, and act more effectively.
Conclusion
Large scale organizational change depends on culture change. The maps
of Flow Engineering are an exercise in culture change, in that they help a
group align around a shared goal, a shared understanding, and a shared
behavior.
Leading Flow Engineering requires transformational leadership:
setting a clear and inspiring vision, showing an authentic example,
providing personalized coaching, and giving space for the team to
practice and experiment on their own.
Flow Engineering aims for a balance between prescriptive and
generative approaches. It also requires anticipating and employing
countermeasures to address headwinds, which we’ll cover in the next
chapter. By leveraging the foundational principles that support Flow
Engineering and crafting your own enabling and governing constraints,
you can aim to make the right way the easy way and maximize your odds
of success.
Key Takeaways
• Leading for flow requires the ability to design feedback loops to help a team ensure
they are on track.
• Flow Engineering aims to balance prescriptive and generative approaches by
helping teams adopt a strategic focus that is generated from their own insights.
• Skillfully applied constraints make it easier for people to do the right thing and
harder to do the wrong thing.

-- 256 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 257 of 353 --

CHAPTER 12
Traps to Avoid
“Control the clock, not obey the clock. Collaborate, not
coerce. Commit, not comply. Complete, not continue.
Improve, not prove. Connect, not conform.”
The mantra from
Leadership Is Language
THERE ARE MANY conditions and challenges that may impede your
progress toward improving flow with Flow Engineering. We include
some notable examples here, as well as countermeasures to mitigate
their negative effects. The top five headwinds we’ve encountered are as
follows:
1. Neglecting the narrative.
2. Misaligned and conflicting incentives.
3. Not mapping the complete stream.
4. Craving unnecessary precision.
5. Conflict with existing operating models.
Neglecting the Narrative
Every significant change can be seen in a negative context. It’s easy to
prefer “the devil you know, over the devil you don’t.” Change requires
effort, commitment, time, capacity, flexibility, and tolerance. To

-- 258 of 353 --

overcome all those costs, you need to consider what message is being
sent by improvement efforts and how that message is being delivered. It’s
very easy for folks who learn about an impending (or worse, already
implemented) change to fear the worst or make assumptions about how
they might be negatively impacted.
It’s common to rush into action on a change, heading straight for a
tool or an automated solution. If teams don’t understand the intention,
they can assume the goal is to monitor or micromanage them.
The following behaviors may look like rapid starts taken by decisive
actors, but they can easily cause change initiatives to fail:
• Not starting with an experiment or a pilot to test assumptions and
place small bets.
• Not making room for failure, learning, and adaptation.
• Heading directly for a target without considering or acknowledging
the current state.
• Diving straight into doing things without a plan.
• Adopting a “with us or against us” stance; creating a rift between
the carefree and the cautious.
• Not communicating, celebrating, and sharing progress, thus
draining momentum as time passes.
A major benefit of Flow Engineering is that by creating maps
together, stakeholders and contributors are included from the start.
Perspectives are shared and a dialogue is created. Detractors can be
assuaged of their fears or, even better, included in planning more
positive actions. Instead of inventing reasons why a change is doomed to
fail, they can be invited to help it succeed (or at least highlight obstacles
in advance).
Outcome discovery and Outcome Mapping sessions, shown in Figure
12.1, can help teams understand current state and opportunities. Based

-- 259 of 353 --

on what you discover, you can direct the conversation more productively
as you continue to map.
For example, if several people mention past failed change efforts, you
may draw out or draw attention to what could be done differently this
time. It’s important to send the message that for better or worse, the past
is gone, and the present opportunities exist only because of what’s gone
before. There’s nowhere to go but forward to better, together. It’s
important when measuring flow that focus remains on the system, not
the individual. We talk more about this in Chapter 13.
FIGURE 12.1: Outcome Discovery and Outcome Mapping Help You Craft a Productive
Narrative
Whatever you say about your improvement efforts, ensure they fit
the language and narrative currently used in the organization. That
could mean framing it in the context of a SAFe implementation, OKRs, a
Big Hairy Audacious Goal, or the latest “Town Hall” messaging. It’s
important to meet people where they are—on
their familiar territory,
not yours. This could mean that you don’t mention Flow Engineering at
first, or ever. It could mean that you rebrand Flow Engineering to better
fit your organization. (For instance, GE took Eric Ries’s
Lean Startup and
adapted it to become GE FastWorks.1) Read the room; play to your

-- 260 of 353 --

audience. As you deliver wins and progress, the narrative can evolve to
encompass more of the ideas shared in this book.
“We already know our biggest constraint.”
Sometimes the first challenge to address is that teams already have a narrative on
what they need to fix. As a change agent, you may run into some variant of this as you
work to improve visibility, measurement, or performance. This can also take the form
of “We just need to execute,” or, “We just need the right people.” It can indicate
concerns about a lack of flow, a lack of results, or a perceived lack of action.
Even if those statements are true, this rush to action makes a dangerous
assumption: that everyone else already shares the same context and aspirations or,
worse, that their buy-in is not necessary. Even if there is a shared awareness of a
constraint, there’s usually more to learn before tackling it. Is the scope of the
constraint understood? Are its causes? What are the key obstacles to addressing it?
Are leaders, peers, and contributors all aligned? Is there a measured baseline for
before/after comparison?
If you can answer those questions with confidence, you may not have to map. If
not, there’s no reason to wallow in analysis paralysis. Quickly jump into mapping (or at
least a conversation) and turn the assumption into a qualified statement. The reason
value and clarity precede flow is that action without clarity or value produces waste,
which can be worse than not acting at all.
Misaligned and Conflicting Incentives
Flow Engineering is all about solving flow problems. That often requires
stepping away from the work to examine the work. This is in conflict
with the status quo of “go, go, go!” in organizations. Even if the pace isn’t
high, it can be challenging simply to pause or even consider how the
work is working.
Common conflicts start to emerge when you look for them:

-- 261 of 353 --

• Short-Term vs. Long-Term Goals: Management might focus on
short-term financial targets, leading to decisions that hinder long-
term technological innovation or sustainability.
• Quantity vs. Quality: Sales teams might be incentivized by
volume rather than the quality of sales, leading to pressure on
delivery teams to fulfill unreasonable promises made during the
sales cycle.
• Individual Performance Metrics: Incentivizing individual
performance in a way that discourages teamwork or collaboration
affects overall project outcomes.
• Growth vs. Stability: Pushing for rapid growth or market capture
without considering technological stability and scalability risks
long-term viability.
• Customer Satisfaction vs. Cost Reduction: Prioritizing cost-
cutting measures might degrade customer experience or service
quality.
• What We Think Is Best vs. What We’re Incentivized For: It’s
important to consider that even in cases where improvement or
change is beneficial, it can be seen as detrimental or disruptive if
incentives are motivating current behavior.
Like the connection depicted in Figure 12.2, outcome discovery and
Outcome Mapping can serve as a way to bridge the gap between local
incentives to establish shared focus on a global target outcome—
something of value to everyone involved.

-- 262 of 353 --

FIGURE 12.2: Outcome Mapping and Discovery Can Bridge Local Incentives by Establishing
a Higher-Value Shared Target
The Utilization Incentive
As we mentioned earlier, the efficiency paradox too often results in decreased
performance when resource utilization is maximized. Even so, we often use utilization
as a proxy for productivity. It turns out being busy isn’t the same as being efficient, and
it certainly isn’t the same as being effective. That busyness is often a result of too
much WIP, unclear priorities, too many dependencies, and a host of other conditions
we’ve discussed, but it can also be a deeply ingrained organizational or cultural habit.
Behaviors like arriving early, staying late, always giving 110%, and stacking calendars
with meetings are often rewarded by organizations that pay closer attention to activity
(or output) than outcomes.
If you find yourself in an environment that seems to be incentivizing
behaviors that restrict flow or sabotage improvement efforts, focus on
what’s within your sphere of influence and control. Seize opportunities
to connect improvement investments to high-level objectives you can
align to (cutting costs, improving NPS, and increasing retention).
Demonstrate quick wins and celebrate actions from others. Ask
provocative questions, like “How do you see X (short-term pursuit)
helping us deliver on Y (long-term goal)?” Build relationships with those
who might support your efforts by sharing your goals and offering your
support to theirs.

-- 263 of 353 --

Even when it seems like you’re stuck in the “frozen middle” of middle
management and unable to drive change, there’s always an effective
action you can take to enable flow. The experience of being stuck is
created by the tension between the uncertainty, disruption, and
investment required for improvement and the relative clarity and ease of
maintaining the status quo.
We’re typically rewarded based on the status quo (or by not
disrupting current performance) but not on change. When you aim to
drive change, look for the incentives reinforcing the status quo; they’re a
more important constraint to influence than individual peers or leaders.
One of the most challenging obstacles you’ll encounter in your efforts to
improve flow is reconciling target outcomes that conflict with existing
incentives. If you notice a target outcome that conflicts with what you’ve
revealed in discovery, work with your mapping participants to reconcile
the gap before proceeding.
Not Mapping the Complete Stream
In cases where you lack visibility into upstream decisions outside of your
control, and in cases where your work has unseen impact on those
downstream, you run the risk of micro-optimization within your sphere
of visibility and control (see Figure 12.3). This potentially creates waste
and may also overburden downstream teams. Local focus is often the
enemy of global progress.
FIGURE 12.3: Limited Visibility Enables Limited Focus

-- 264 of 353 --

Flow Engineering maps can help you drive a productive conversation
and invitation to make those invisible upstream and downstream
activities visible and measurable. Bring an incomplete map to groups
who can help you fill in the gaps. That visibility and measurement will
allow you to make flow improvement decisions and changes without the
risk of micro-optimization.
Craving Unnecessary Precision
Seeking precision is a common trap when starting to measure value
stream performance. When you’re aiming to reduce wait times in a value
stream, it’s essential to adopt a comprehensive approach rather than
getting mired in perfectionism or narrow focus.
First, examine the entire process from inception to delivery; focusing
solely on one stage without considering upstream delays can be
misleading. It’s a common pitfall to let the pursuit of perfection hinder
data-driven decision-making or, worse, deter attempts to improve the
process altogether. For instance, tightening the developer feedback loop
is commendable, but it’s also crucial to address issues like interruptions
and work in progress (WIP) first; it does no good to improve productivity
at the cost of developer burnout. Similarly, an overemphasis on detail in
the DevOps loop while neglecting significant time wasted upstream just
adds to the waste.
Investing substantial time and resources in creating detailed metrics
or dashboards that are rarely used is just another form of waste. These
tools should aid frequent and meaningful decision-making, not just
serve as annual review instruments. Being truly data-driven means
consistently integrating data into decision-making processes, not just in
occasional, isolated instances.
To effectively increase the customer Net Promoter Score (NPS) or any
other key performance indicator, it’s important to identify and measure

-- 265 of 353 --

the drivers behind these metrics. This should be done with just enough
precision to inform confident decision-making, focusing on readily
actionable insights first. Overly precise measurements can be redundant
if not matched with the capability to utilize them effectively. In
summary, in value stream optimization, a broad, pragmatic, and
purpose-driven approach is more beneficial than an excessively detailed
or narrow one.
FIGURE 12.4: Example Value Stream Map with Irrelevant Downstream Precision
When your constraint adds weeks of delay, a few hours difference isn’t
consequential.
Consider spending eight months building out and debugging the
ultimate metrics dashboard, but it only gets used once a year for
performance reviews. This is like measuring with a micrometer and then
cutting with a dull axe. If you often check the weather out of boredom
but neglect to check the weather before you leave the house, are you
really data-driven?
If you work backward from the target, the necessary resolution
becomes clear: Do you want customer NPS to go up? What is driving
NPS? How do we know? What’s the obstacle to raising it?
Measure progress in whatever way gives you enough signal to make a
decision with reasonable confidence, and worry about detail when the

-- 266 of 353 --

easy improvements have been accomplished and you’re a pro at data-
driven decision-making.
Precision is useless in measuring value stream performance—unless
you are prepared for and capable of using it. If you can swing an axe with
micrometer precision, go ahead and invest in a micrometer.
Isao Yoshino summed this up in
Leading to Learn, Learning to Lead:
“A practical style is more important than precision when setting targets.
Precision doesn’t matter in the beginning—you need the direction to go,
and then you can learn and improve it. Spending weeks and weeks of
doing nothing is worse.”2
Conflict with Existing Operating Models
Meeting people where they are means understanding and acknowledging
the current state prior to striving for change. This is not just a show of
respect. The inertia of the current state operating model is always the
primary challenge to bringing about change. Here are some tips to
support your efforts leading Flow Engineering in complicated, large-
scale environments.
The first thing to remember is that there’s bound to be resistance if
the context, framing, and value is unclear to any participants. Ensure the
narrative is shared and highlights the purpose of the effort: targeting
process waste and friction, not individuals and contributions. Outcome
Mapping can help establish the right conditions for effective mapping.
Second, if the organization is large enough, the mess will be large. It
may be difficult to represent, but any structured effort to visualize is
preferable to nothing. You can always check in to see if the
representation is reasonably accurate and solicit feedback and
adjustment. Remember, precision isn’t valuable or necessary. You may
not get timing that adds up at all, but perhaps the most valuable
information is about the types of activities being performed.

-- 267 of 353 --

Third, you have a variety of countermeasures available at your
disposal, and you have smart stakeholders you can engage. Parallelization
may be a great option or not possible. Information flow could lead to the
greatest improvement. Sometimes the most important waste to target is
simply the most annoying waste.
Fourth, improvement isn’t solely the responsibility of the facilitator.
You didn’t make the mess, so you’re certainly not accountable for
cleaning it all up. Sometimes the best improvement you can hope for
today is visibility and awareness. Keep an open mind, listen to the
participants, and challenge them to be creative and resourceful. Make it
safe and easy for them to contribute their perspectives and expertise, and
you’ll see solutions emerge.
Finally, unless you find yourself in a generative culture where
participants are comfortable talking about value-adding and non–value-
adding activities in a constructive way, focus on the less sensitive and
subjective information and work up to more sophisticated
measurements over time.
CASE STUDY
Agile Release Train Improvement in a Financial Services Firm
The Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) is one of the most widespread approaches to bringing
order to software development at scale. SAFe’s program increments (PIs) represent large-
scale (eight to twelve week) delivery involving a great deal of planning and dependency
reconciliation. Standard PI planning can take two full days. In many organizations, it can
take a week or two, with the work often hidden in parallel and fractional activities conducted
by a variety of stakeholders.
In their efforts to create order at such a massive scale, it’s easy to lose the concern for
end-to-end flow in the details and entrenched concerns of the many groups involved. This
scale of time and team size makes mapping challenging and significantly complicates
improvement efforts. Sometimes it seems like you may be opening a can of worms by

-- 268 of 353 --

mapping, but in our experience, even the messiest current state has a better future state
hiding just out of plain sight.
Consider one of the world’s largest financial institutions, in the midst of a large-scale
SAFe implementation, struggling with delays, friction, lack of visibility, and no clear
opportunity to improve. Steve was brought in to cut lead time in their core Agile Release
Train (ART, which is near identical to a value stream in the SAFe world) lead time by 50%.
This was a tough sell to begin with, since most stakeholders only cared about and measured
their own segment of the value stream, often based on best-case scenario timing.
The problem with the best-case scenario is that it rarely resembles the common
experience and it leaves little room for improvement. Excessively optimistic estimates often
indicate a culture where realistic assessments are punished in some way, leading to what’s
often referred to as “the watermelon effect,” where measures look green on the outside, but
they’re red on the inside. None of these effects are a result of SAFe specifically. Any large-
scale effort lacking visibility and alignment can foster challenging conditions. Despite the
hurdles, there seemed to be a huge opportunity to rapidly improve lead time performance.
This mapping effort would be the first time the organization ever looked at the entire
end-to-end flow of work across the ART. The scale also made it extremely difficult to get any
kind of representative data. Nobody could recall how much time passed between stages or
any particular detail. When your lead time is longer than a year, the details tend to get blurry.
FIGURE 12.5: The Current State Map Depicting the Full Agile Release Train (ART)
Mapping relied on participants’ rough recollection of activity stages and timing but
drove an extremely productive and engaging conversation on how time in the value stream
was spent. Tackling value-adding and non–value-adding time is a sensitive topic in what
Ron Westrum would classify as pathological or bureaucratic environments.3 In order to
shine a light on how time is spent without creating a false dichotomy of “good” and “bad,”

-- 269 of 353 --

the time was classified across categories, as listed in Table 12.1. The classification provided a
simple added dimension of context to a map with imprecise timing in order to identify the
target constraint with higher confidence.
TABLE 12.1: Visual Activity Classification Legend, Depicting Non–Value-Adding, Testing,
Value-Adding, and Coordinating Activities
Activity Class Definition % of Lead
Time Color
Non–value-
adding
Doesn’t add stakeholder value to the outcome 58% Pink
Testing Validating work (non–value-adding) 14% Purple
Value-adding Creates or enhances value from a stakeholder
perspective
18% Blue
Coordinating Planning, organizing, scheduling, not including 3–6
months of pre-planning (non–value-adding)
10% Green
When Value Stream Mapping, recall the 5 Rs presented in Part 2: recent, real, reach,
representative, and road-tested. We want to focus on representative flow: What does
activity typically look like? In this case, more than 90% of the work in this ART involved
changes to the mainframe. Despite this, the improvement efforts targeted only the
development segment of the stream and only non-mainframe changes.
Their micro-optimizations within development were showing good performance, but the
true lead time for the value stream was getting worse and worse. All this context arose
during the mapping sessions; these hidden dynamics were brought to the surface so they
could be addressed directly. It became clear why performance wasn’t improving along with
the metrics and why work seemed to be getting slower and more onerous over time.
This reality was difficult to address, but it was the only way to begin to truly improve
performance. There was a great deal of friction, uncertainty, and discomfort in the mapping
process and the conversations it evoked, but it all would have gone unseen and unsaid were
it not for the effort to map and improve. Mapping provided the time, a safe space, and
encouragement to discuss waste, collective responsibility, and organizational performance
measurement.
Mapping a future state value stream provided a vision of what was possible, even with
little to no influence over the broader system of work. The Future State Map in Figure 12.6

-- 270 of 353 --

shows what was possible by simply focusing on the critical path to value delivery without
modifying existing processes. Even without significant changes to activities within the value
stream, it was radically redesigned to meet the performance goal, and the design could be
implemented immediately, without disruption to individual contributors.
FIGURE 12.6: Example Future State Map Depicting Non-Critical and Non–Value-Adding
Activities
The Future State Map depicts non-critical and non–value-adding activities
executed in parallel rather than blocking flow.
Table 12.2 outlines the key differences depicted between the current and future states,
but it only alludes to the potential for high ROI improvement. Having the Value Stream Map
and discussion provided visibility into exactly which stages could be significantly improved
with simple changes, which would rapidly drive costs and lead time down while improving
customer and employee satisfaction and allowing for faster feedback and adaptation.

-- 271 of 353 --

TABLE 12.2: Current State Flow Performance vs. Future State
Current State Future State
Unclear improvement opportunities Single constraint to target
Optimized for edge cases Optimized for common cases
$2M per release $1M per release
64-week lead time 32-week lead time (with no stage
modification)
Non–value-adding stages blocking
progress
Non–value-adding stages executed in
parallel
Value-adding activity: 17% of lead time Value-adding activity: 53% of lead time
Even within a highly complicated and large-scale SAFe implementation, Value Stream
Mapping can provide a complementary approach that dramatically improves visibility,
collaboration, and performance without disruption or significant investment of time or
money.
Conclusion
Flow Engineering may seem simple, but it’s not easy. We pointed out tips
and traps throughout the mapping practices, but leading change is a
larger challenge. You’ll encounter situations that seem impossible to
depict as a simple flow of activity. You will always be working within an
existing narrative, or confronted with several, and needing to craft your
own. You’ll encounter misaligned and conflicting incentives that
threaten to derail or sabotage improvement. You’ll be forced to map an
incomplete system with incomplete information and make trade-offs in
service of your target outcome. Outcome Mapping prompts the team to
anticipate obstacles such as these. These can seem insurmountable when
you actually encounter them. Stay focused on the overarching goal by

-- 272 of 353 --

regularly reminding yourself and the team of the benefits of breaking
through.
Key Takeaways
• Seek to understand the existing narrative and craft an effective narrative to fuel
your progress. Effective leadership requires effective storytelling.
• Identify misaligned or conflicting incentives so they can be addressed and
mitigated. Look for a north star that everyone can align to.
• There is an art and science to establishing effective scope. Leverage the principles
and guidance we’ve shared to map a scope that reveals the key constraint.
• Precision can be an obstacle in the early stages. Make sure you consider your target
objective and focus on only what’s needed to act effectively.
• Just like the existing narrative and incentives, the present operating model needs
to be considered and navigated. Remember to always meet people (and systems)
where they are.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 273 of 353 --

CHAPTER 13
Value Stream Management
“One of the interesting outcomes from clients that
adopt value stream management, is that they realize
how inefficient silos have made their organization, and
that by drawing the lines through the organization, they
found out that they have product teams.”
CHRIS CONDO, Principal Analyst, Forrester
What Is Value Stream Management?
PETER HINES DEFINED Value Stream Management in 1998 as “a new
strategic and operational approach to the data capture, analysis,
planning and implementation of effective change within the core cross-
functional or cross-company processes required to achieve a truly lean
enterprise.”1 Value Stream Management has come to be associated with
tools for monitoring value stream performance, but Value Stream
Management remains primarily a management practice,
something you
do. It centers on two primary activities: (1) optimizing the flow of work
that delivers customer value and (2) measuring those delivered outcomes
to make better decisions.
If you think of an organization as a network of value streams
(discussed further in Chapter 14), Value Stream Management includes
the design, operation, and optimization of that network, though the

-- 274 of 353 --

practice is often focused on one stream at a time. Because Value Stream
Management is a process of ongoing optimization, it is helpful to begin
by looking at the transition from
project thinking to
product thinking.
The Movement from Project to Product
Project management has long been the dominant model for managing
major technology initiatives. The problem is that it applies a finite
solution to an infinite opportunity. Once delivered, a project is largely
forgotten and transitioned into a maintenance state of minimal
investment and attention.
FIGURE 13.1: Focus on Project Leads to Ignoring Longer Term Impact
Because of the massive opportunities afforded by technology,
software, and global networks, the value of long-lived systems that can
grow massively in scale and be continuously improved has driven a need
for a focus on continuous and sustained flow.
The value stream model acknowledges that most business needs and
opportunities have a long life cycle—a continuous flow—that can’t be
satisfied with a singular or even periodic effort in relative isolation.
Figure 13.2 illustrates the continuous improvement possible with the
stability, continuity, and iteration of delivery across an established value
stream.

-- 275 of 353 --

FIGURE 13.2: Each Cycle of Continuous Improvement Builds on the Previous One
Thinking of your teams in the context of delivering products via
value streams allows you to effectively mitigate the three Ds of scale. The
stable team membership and investment in continuous improvement
avoids disengagement. The orientation to a clear and sustained customer
value relationship avoids disorientation. The continuity provided by
working toward long-term, sustainable outcomes avoids distraction. The
transition from projects to products is a transition from disengagement,
disorientation, and distraction to flow.
CASE STUDY
Rapid Improvement from Projects to Products
In 2020 an agency was looking to add predictability, scale, and consistency to their process.
Their ultimate goal was to begin to develop their own specialized products and create
sustainable value streams to replace their volatile project-based workflow.
The agency was looking to scale without adding headcount or burning out staff. In the
short term, they wanted a way to boost margins on repeated activities, which we identified
as return business from existing clients. In the long term, they wanted to productize their
offerings to maximize margin, stability, and scalability. Primary challenges we identified
were consistency, strategy, and clarity.

-- 276 of 353 --

FIGURE 13.3: Current State Map: Steps, Timing, Roles, Tools, Artifacts
In total, the process went from a current state of thirty-three days with two-thirds of that
consumed by handoffs and delays to a target state of seven days with minimal delays via
increased process visibility (Kanban), minimal automation (Slack notifications), and an
estimation playbook. As a side benefit, the team characterized the effort as an Empathy
Quest since it provided a way for the team to understand the work and value provided by
unfamiliar roles, as well as the relationships between upstream and downstream
contributors.
Flow Engineering helped quickly kick-start their project-to-product transition, and the
simple improvements discovered through mapping demonstrated dramatic impact with
little investment.
The transition from project to product is a story of flow. The need for
increasing performance, continuous value delivery, and sustainable
operations has driven product orientation. But this product operating
model is not without costs.

-- 277 of 353 --

FIGURE 13.4: Project or Product Orientation Lies on a Spectrum
The behaviors and opportunities of continuous product delivery
demand an investment in management infrastructure and practices
capable of facilitating that flow over a long term at large scale. Smaller
batches, continuous iteration and feedback, adaptation, and
sustainability all require information, visibility, and clarity to manage
effectively and avoid being overwhelmed. This need has been addressed
by the practice and tooling of Value Stream Management. Value Stream
Management builds upon disciplines like service management,
application life cycle management, and Lean management to focus on
the complete value stream, as well as the interactions and
interdependence across streams. It requires sustained performance
monitoring, trend analysis, and large-scale observability of work

-- 278 of 353 --

performance to enable better product outcomes. It’s a key component in
scaling and sustaining your Flow Engineering efforts.
Value Stream Mapping vs. Value Stream Management
Value Stream Mapping sits as a single method within the overall practice
of Value Stream Management. Where Value Stream Mapping helps you
understand flow of a single stream as it exists in a single point in time
and then design a future state, Value Stream Management is a
continuous practice that tracks value stream performance over time,
revealing historical patterns and increasingly providing trend analysis
and prediction capabilities. Table 13.1 contrasts the two across a number
of dimensions.

-- 279 of 353 --

TABLE 13.1: A Comparison of Value Stream Mapping and Value Stream Management
Value Stream Mapping Value Stream Management
Iterative and periodic practice Continuous practice
Easy to start Difficult to start
Human-centric, storytelling, and narrative Tool- and data-centric, automated insights
Perspective and qualitative focus Perspective and qualitative focus
Visual collaboration Visibility and continuous inspection
Walls and sticky notes (also virtual) Integrations, dashboards, and data
Creates and recreates business case Ongoing incremental optimization
Highlights waste and assumptions Automates for continuous compliance
Defines present and future Records past and present
Facilitates creativity, reinvention Facilitates improvement, iteration
Future opportunity: living representation Future opportunity: simulation & prediction
Enabling constraint Governing constraint
Why Not Dive Straight into Value Stream Management?
We’ve spent most of this book talking about value, clarity, and flow
because without considering these factors, efforts to improve
performance can quickly fail. Contributors are very familiar with
performance measurement, and a new name or new tool to accomplish
it is likely going to be regarded with a lot of skepticism. Eli Goldratt
highlighted a key insight for driving change when he stated, “Tell me
how you’ll measure me and I’ll tell you how I’m going to behave.”2
Consider typical testimonials from engineers involved in a Value
Stream Management adoption initiative:

-- 280 of 353 --

Senior Engineer 1: This Value Stream Management thing feels like
Agile™ 2.0. What I’ve seen has been very hand-wavy and vague,
without many specifics. I am still not clear what actual data is going
to be input (other than ticket state) into this system and what
actually is going to be done with that data. I want to see concrete
examples and not hand-waving about “value.”
Senior Engineer 2: Generating metrics from ticket state sounds
good in theory, but ultimately, I don’t think it makes sense. They
want to analyze the software development process the same way you
would analyze an assembly line. I’m sure there are some things that
carry over, but overall, I just don’t think you can apply methods that
work for managing an assembly line to knowledge work. Once we
start getting pressure for those metrics to look a certain way, we will
game them and continue on with the real work on our own. That
first Value Stream Management meeting we had as a team, a lot of it
felt like a normal retrospective but with more ceremony, fluff, and
buzzwords. Even about 90% of the items that were brought up for
improvement were just things we had brought up in previous retros
but never had a chance to prioritize. Maybe the next session will have
more meat.
Formal studies like “Can Performance Metrics Harm Performance?”
by Berend van der Kolk and Wesley Kaufmann have identified other
risks. They highlight two common effects:
First, professionals attempted to reduce cognitive dissonance by focusing on
quantifying performance in a broad sense. The interviewed professionals changed
their behavior by focusing on easily measurable parts of their tasks, hence adapting
to the “result-driven” organizational reality.3

-- 281 of 353 --

This first behavior is known as the streetlight effect, characterized by
a parable: A policeman encounters a drunk man searching for his lost
keys under a streetlight, despite losing them in the park. The policeman
asks why he’s searching in this area, to which the drunk man replies,
“That is where the light is.” We tend to look for things where it’s easy to
look.
The second effect described by van der Kolk is that,
Some professionals chose to pay less attention to other activities that were not easily
measurable. For instance, it was indicated in the study that some professionals did
not “connect” anymore to colleagues because of the introduction of performance
measurement, indicating the erosion of the important organizational practice of
“collegiality.” In other words, we begin to ignore the things we can’t easily measure.4
In The Principles of Product Development Flow, one of Don
Reinertsen’s first principles highlights the common mistake of
performance measurement and an upstream cause of these types of
reactions: “The Inactivity Principle: Watch the work product, not the
worker.”5 It’s easy to attribute delays to the contributors within a value
stream, but it’s more accurate to look at the system and watch the work
product move through it. This requires visibility and accurate
information flow, but it’s also the only way to see the forest for the trees.
CASE STUDY
Evolving Measurement from Individual Metrics to Team-Level
Metrics at Parchment
Many organizations are still grappling with a necessary evolution of how they measure
performance and apparently learning what not to do for the first time, firsthand. Systems
thinking has called attention to the impossibility of measuring a whole by its parts, yet it
continues across seemingly every organization.

-- 282 of 353 --

Phil Clark, VP Head of Application Engineering at Parchment, shared a common journey
from individual measurement to more holistic measurement in a presentation at Flowtopia
in 2023.6
Phil had been with the company when the transformation began in 2012 and during the
shift to product-aligned cross-functional teams in 2015, and he has witnessed this full
evolution toward more holistic measurement. In terms of his own journey, he recalled
pivotal moments that embodied the three phases laid out in Figure 13.5.
FIGURE 13.5: Phil’s Journey at Parchment
Phil’s metrics journey includes eleven years with Parchment. It showcases a
twenty-four-year evolution from individual metrics to a combination of team and
system metrics, along with team sentiment.

-- 283 of 353 --

His experiences with individual metrics may seem familiar to you:
• He recalled a senior executive in the early 2000s stating, “Good engineers should
produce 5,250 lines of code in six months’ time.”
• His individual target for utilization was set at 85%, which he “frequently gamed for
weekly time entry to make the numbers look good.”
• He recalled stumbling on the information showing his place at four out of twenty in the
team’s stack ranking of engineers.
Phil’s journey follows a learning and implementation evolution that may be familiar to
you as well:
• 2018: Read
The Phoenix Project,
The Goal, and
Making Work Visible.
• Began transitioning Scrum teams to Kanban.
• 2019: Read
Accelerate,
Project to Product, and
The Principles of Product Development
Flow.
• 2020: Read
Team Topologies,
Sooner Safer Happier; researched and learned about
Value Stream Management.
• Introduced Value Stream Management platform.
• 2021: Delivered Value Stream Mapping and discovered the Value Stream Management
Consortium.
• Launched internally developed metrics dashboard.
This mix of theory, practice, and tooling (in that order) provided Phil a strong foundation
on-ramp to useful performance measurement, as well as a resource that informs better
conversations with leaders still using legacy and mechanistic mental models. He learned “to
tell them the why in their language.” It’s not enough to have what you think is a better way to
measure performance; it has to be sold to the leaders looking for answers. Their
measurement shifted from individual focus to collective focus, as laid out in Table 13.2.

-- 284 of 353 --

TABLE 13.2: The Parchment Measurement Journey
Individual Scrutiny Collective Flow
Lines of code
Utilization
Comparing individuals based on individual output
Outcomes over output
Team metrics
Projects to products
Value Stream Management
System metrics: Flow, DORA
Sentiment metrics: SPACE, DX, etc.
His approach espouses a focus on bottlenecks and conversations to enable performance
at the team level. By focusing on value streams rather than individual contributors, Phil was
able to build a measurement context that not only avoids the negative consequences of
individual focus, but also puts performance in the context of teams, flow, and outcomes.
Mapping to Enable Value Stream Management
The three gaps in solutions to the problem of scale we introduced in Part
1 also apply to Value Stream Management: alignment gap, visibility gap,
and on-ramp gap.
Alignment Gap: Value Stream Management platforms often cost
hundreds of thousands of dollars to effectively pilot and millions of
dollars to fully implement. That can be a hard sell in an organization
that’s only just hearing about value streams or wondering if this is
just the latest trend. In order to effectively define the value of the
investment, the benefits to multiple stakeholders, the obstacles to
address, and a clear plan of implementation, Flow Engineering can be
leveraged to assist in making a strong, clear, and relevant case linking
a Value Stream Management investment to performance objectives
and business goals. By including stakeholders in mapping or sharing
clear maps, it’s far easier to align the decision-makers to a compelling
opportunity.

-- 285 of 353 --

Visibility Gap: The map is not the territory, and data doesn’t give
you the full picture. By mapping first, you can establish a shared
mental model of what the pilot stream looks like and how it behaves.
This makes it far easier to instrument and understand where the gaps
in the data may lie. Data is often segmented or incomplete; it needs
context to bridge gaps. Mapping provides you with a wealth of
context from multiple stakeholders, inside or outside a team.
On-Ramp Gap: Value Stream Management implementation is
easier and less risky if you start small, demonstrate value, and grow
using positive results. It should be applied to an ideal candidate
stream (which requires context from Flow Engineering analysis). You
need access to data, which means you likely need to engage
dependent teams. That data must be high quality, which means you
will benefit from analyzing the percent complete and accurate
(%C&A) of the pilot stream activities and the state of that data across
the flow of activities.

-- 286 of 353 --

Tackling the On-Ramp Gap by Reducing Uncertainty
There are several key factors that create the on-ramp gap in organizations:
• Delay: There’s too often a significant delay between deciding to do something
and seeing any results. This makes everyone nervous and can lead to a lot of
distracting “are we there yet” status requests.
• Visibility: Compounding the delay problem, progress is not easily visible.
• Uncertainty: When you start anything, you have significantly less confidence and
clarity than when you’re nearly at the finish line.
To counteract the delay, visibility, and confidence factors, teams will often invest in
elaborate planning, slide decks, documentation, meetings, prototypes, etc. These
aren’t necessarily waste, but they can be extremely time intensive and are rarely
collaborative efforts, leading to clarity issues and misalignment. This planning
paradox—that planning reduces uncertainty but delays delivery—plagues
implementation efforts, since “just enough” planning is both an art and a science.
Rapid mapping with Flow Engineering reduces uncertainty and delivers early
outcomes versus the delay and cost of waiting until Value Stream Management is fully
implemented.
Consider the uncertainty of the two teams in Figure 13.6.7 Team A follows a typical
implementation journey. They may invest in training, certifications, planning, and
documentation—very little of which impacts uncertainty. In fact, it can easily increase
it. Many certifications and large-scale frameworks are parts of complicated,
comprehensive bodies of knowledge and can quickly become daunting as known-
unknowns pile up. They’ll have to cross hurdles of data availability (siloed tools and
ownership of data) and data quality (incomplete, incorrect, corrupt, unlabeled,
uncorrelated, and misleading data), all before they can see any semblance of Value
Stream Management manifested in their organization. They’ll likely start with a small
group to minimize disruption and cost (and having too many chefs in the kitchen),
which means they’ll have to bring others up to speed later, likely when they’re needed
at full speed. Even when data is integrated and made available, it likely won’t be
trusted, and fear of individual evaluation was most likely not assuaged in the
communication plan. (There was a communication plan, right?) As a result,
uncertainty remains high, and results remain minimal for nearly the entire
implementation journey.
On-ramp = months.

-- 287 of 353 --

FIGURE 13.6: Waiting for Data Availability and Quality Means Uncertainty Remains
High for Longer and Outcomes Are Later to Arrive
Team B begins with Flow Engineering. As a result, a valuable target outcome for
implementation is defined, well-considered, and shared from the very start. Many
contributors from multiple domains can be included as a result of minimal time
requirements. The group can easily select an ideal candidate stream and quickly
collect a baseline of performance, as well as quick wins for performance
improvement. They can map out dependencies for data access and quality concerns
and share those maps with groups involved and affected. They can take all the insights
they collect in a few hours mapping and craft a Flow Roadmap that lays out the
implementation in clear terms for everyone to share. Uncertainty and delays are low,
visibility and outcomes are high.
On-ramp = days.
To mitigate the risks of diving right in, you can bootstrap your Value
Stream Management implementation journey with Flow Engineering by
starting small and scrappy and implementing it where it’s most relevant
and valuable, as well as where the data, access, and practice are most
readily available. Mapping can help you understand the value of
implementation, the scope and shape of a candidate stream, and where

-- 288 of 353 --

the data resides (and the quality of it), as well as plan the implementation
with a Flow Roadmap.
Conclusion
Value Stream Management provides a method to enable ongoing
performance improvement of a value stream. A common mistake is
attempting to dive straight into Value Stream Management without first
doing the preparatory work needed to align the team around outcomes,
map the full end-to-end value stream, etc. The ability to effectively
increase flow by managing a value stream depends on establishing value
and clarity using the mapping process.
Developing this level of rigor is a great accomplishment but requires
continuous work. If you are not getting better, you are getting worse;
there is no remaining still. But experiencing success in Value Stream
Management builds confidence that similar approaches can be shared
throughout the organization. This brings us to the subject of the next
chapter: scaling Flow Engineering.
Key Takeaways
• Value Stream Management includes mapping, observability, tooling, data, and,
most of all, people.
• Value Stream Management takes us beyond org charts as the structure of
organizations to stream alignment and operation.
• Value Stream Management includes operations, collaboration, incentives, funding,
and more.
• Value Stream Management encompasses individual contributors, value streams,
and value stream networks.
• There is a growing ecosystem of Value Stream Management tools that are providing
key capabilities to manage streams at large scale.

-- 289 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 290 of 353 --

CHAPTER 14
Scaling Flow Engineering
“Finally, enacting new systems is not about getting ‘the
answer,’ it is about developing networks of engaged
and trusting people who are guided by a common
understanding of the current system and a
commitment to create new systems.”
PETER SENGE,
The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning
Organization
FLOW ENGINEERING COUNTERACTS the disengagement, disorientation, and
distraction costs of scale. But to have a large-scale impact, you must
achieve this effect across an entire organization. That’s neither feasible
nor affordable one value stream at a time. We’ve worked with
organizations composed of tens of thousands of contributors, with giant
portfolios of products distributed across regions, divisions, and lines of
business. Even in a few hours per stream, the task of mapping it all is
immense. Luckily, you’ll never have to map it all to have a dramatic
impact on the overall system.
Just like Figure 14.1 depicts, it’s often simple to see that dependencies
are common, and by addressing them for one stream, you can address
them across the entire organization. As you learn information about
where else the dependency is utilized (change advisory boards, security
testing), you can estimate the broader impact of improvements.

-- 291 of 353 --

FIGURE 14.1: Value Streams Sharing a Common Constraint
Many value streams share common constraints. Once a common constraint is
identified, it can be improved for all dependent streams.
This obviously has dramatic implications for the ROI of mapping and
improvement. It’s not uncommon for a few hours of mapping to uncover
a week of easily addressed delay or waste shared by a dozen or more
teams. That represents an ROI of multiple orders of magnitude.
In other cases, a dependency will be internal to the team or not
linked to a shared team or stream (tooling, capability, information flow,
data quality), and either by estimation or by mapping a similar team or
stream workflow, the commonality emerges. For example, each team
may be copying data from one system to another, and a single
integration could address it across all teams. Without the visibility across
streams, the global impact would likely go unnoticed or unaddressed
because the local impact seems small.
To achieve global impact from locally discovered constraints, waste,
and friction, there are a few simple and rapid methods to reach out
beyond a single stream and assess larger-scale opportunities:
• Sharing Maps: You can easily share the maps you create with
other teams and groups to share progress and learning, validate
your understanding from their perspective, or enlist them to help
fill in gaps. This can also spark their interest in creating their own
maps or joining your efforts.

-- 292 of 353 --

• Surveying: Sending out a survey, poll, or even a discussion thread
on a chat platform like Slack can help you quickly and
asynchronously gather information from a variety of perspectives
and form a larger-scale understanding. You can ask any of the
questions captured in Flow Engineering, such as “What’s your
current target outcome?” or “What’s having the biggest impact on
your lead time?” or “What’s your most impactful dependency?”
Answers can be compiled and synthesized to inform key areas of
focus and where you may want to dig deeper.
• Communities of Practice: We discuss the role and operation of
communities of practice later in the chapter.
The Value Stream Network as a Map of the Enterprise
James Martin illustrated in
The Great Transition how “an enterprise is a
collection of value streams.”1 Any given organization today may look a
lot more like a loosely or tightly coupled collection of teams. It is this
coupling that creates an interconnected network. As that network is
formalized and stabilized, stable value streams emerge.
As organizations shift from project to product, they focus less on
disruptive reorganization to tackle individual deliverables and instead
organize to continually improve how they deliver customer value. Mik
Kersten’s book
Project to Product covers this transition and introduces
the concept of the value stream network in the context of measuring and
improving flow.2 The ultimate impact of Flow Engineering is to improve
flow across the entire value stream network.
Identifying Value Streams across Your Organization
Once you’ve begun to map your value streams, you’ll need to start
organizing and creating a holistic understanding of streams within the
larger context of your organization. We’ve found it helpful to consider

-- 293 of 353 --

the behavior and characteristics of value streams as they lie across two
dimensions:
1. Developmental to Operational
2. Core to Supportive
Understanding these dimensions provides a structure to think and
talk about the purpose and attributes of different value streams and how
you can design and adapt them over time.
1. DEVELOPMENTAL VS. OPERATIONAL VALUE STREAMS
Value Streams are frequently categorized as either developmental or
operational, depending on whether they focus on delivering a consistent
product or developing something new each time. But this binary
categorization hides a useful and more flexible spectrum of
identification.
There are many reasons why strictly categorizing streams into
developmental or operational works against you, but here are three
important aspects:
1. Binary categorization only works for things that are either/or, but
streams always have a mix of focus and obligations. They have to
both improve and maintain stability, operate and develop,
execute and innovate. What matters is the degree to which they
satisfy each of the conflicting demands.
2. Binary categorization creates an “us-versus-them” scenario where
streams are at odds by default. It forces you to do more work to
compensate for a model that doesn’t work for you. DevOps is the
response to an unhelpful separation between development and
operations in software development. Repeating the same issue
with value streams will create the same problems DevOps has
worked to address for over a decade. If you separate

-- 294 of 353 --

developmental and operational concerns into distinct silos, you
immediately raise truly challenging questions: What do
developmental and operational streams have in common? How
does each leverage the strengths of the other? How might they
speak the same language and collaborate? What’s the common
ground they should meet on?
3. Binary categorization makes it difficult to think about how to
balance the necessary ingredients for performance. You can’t
exclusively focus on only development or only operations, but
binary focus implies you have to, or at least demands some form
of compromise. This results in compromised decision-making
since the inherent flaw in the separation has to be continuously
reconciled. This reconciliation may be easy for some, but if
DevOps is an example we can reference, it’s rarely accomplished.
What you have in reality is a spectrum of focus and investment
with development and operations as opposite poles. An
individual, team, or team of teams can focus more on innovation,
a developmental pursuit, with its own set of metrics and
measures to indicate progress while still maintaining an aspect of
stability and efficiency. They don’t choose one or the other; they
simply choose one	
over the other. This has implications for
management and adaptation over time. The focus becomes a
decision filter, which can be used to identify value, build clarity,
and enable flow.
Consider an operational value stream, such as a team of teams
managing infrastructure and providing services to internal stakeholder
value streams and contributors. You can see it plotted in Figure 14.2 as
Stream B. It may have a current focus on efficiency and predictability and
monitoring metrics that reflect that focus: cost of operations, incident
recovery lead time, mean time between failures, etc. If some external

-- 295 of 353 --

condition arises to disturb the focus or priority of the stream, the stream
leadership and contributors can act accordingly and shift along the
spectrum.
FIGURE 14.2: The Spectrum of Flow Investment
Say operational AI reaches a level of capability that allows them to
improve their target metrics, they could temporarily shift further toward
developmental activities to evaluate it, adopt it, and implement it.
On the other end of the spectrum, consider a product development
value stream, like Stream A in Figure 14.2. They’re facing criticism for
high costs, low predictability, and rising production defects. They
primarily measure effectiveness and customer outcomes, but their lack
of operational capability and focus is beginning to jeopardize their
sustainability. They can shift focus further toward operational metrics,
capabilities, and investment.

-- 296 of 353 --

TABLE 14.1: Developmental and Operational Focus Implications
Enabling Developmental Operational
Focused on:
Effectiveness
Design
Innovation
Novelty
Value creation
Efficiency
Execution
Stability
Maintenance
Value maximization
Characterized by:
Variation
Uncertainty
Investigation
Experimentation
Consistency
Certainty
Measurement
Optimization
Function of constraints: Enablement Governance
The potential to shift along this spectrum provides flexibility for
value streams to find and adjust their position as needs or opportunities
arise. It provides another method for evaluating the current state and
defining the future state.
2. CORE VS. SUPPORTIVE VALUE STREAMS
Just like we have a spectrum of operational and developmental focus for
value streams, it’s helpful to think about value streams as they relate to
core and supportive concerns. This can make it easier to share a common
language about streams and stream behaviors that impact flow, as well as
aid decision-making when it comes to value stream design and
performance improvement.
Core streams are tied to the strategy and business model of the
organization, while supportive value streams ensure core streams have
access to resources, capabilities, and information required to operate
effectively and efficiently. Core streams are any flow of work that directly
contributes to revenue or value creation for the business. Core value

-- 297 of 353 --

streams contribute directly to external customer value. There is a value-
experiencing or purchasing customer or user at the end of the stream.
Every company has at least one core stream and can have many, often
connected to each other in some way. Core streams are
why you’re in
business.
Core value streams leverage supportive streams. Supportive streams
provide services and capabilities to core streams. Supportive value
streams contribute value to the core streams by enabling or enhancing
their performance. Supportive streams are
how you stay in business. The
ideal model for this interaction is a “pull” from the core stream to the
supportive stream, which is providing its value as a self-service capability
to the core.
Core streams can be supported by multiple supportive streams.
Supportive streams can then be supported by further supportive streams.
And, supportive streams can also support multiple core streams. For
example, the same supportive stream can provide automated testing and
building capabilities to two separate product teams.
Each value stream has at least one defined customer (internal or
external) and consumes the products and services of others as their
customer. Figure 14.3 (see page 234) shows how a core stream relies on a
supportive stream for an infrastructure platform and how that platform
team relies on a build pipeline provided by another stream. If these
streams are creating self-service capabilities, the dependent streams can
leverage those capabilities on demand without an interruption to flow.

-- 298 of 353 --

FIGURE 14.3: Interdependence of Core and Supportive Value Streams
This is how a company like Amazon builds loosely coupled services
that can be used individually and interchangeably while providing
services to other services and products like Amazon.com or customer
applications atop that. A platform team providing services to product
teams, who consume a design system from a design team and get
approvals via an accessible self-service legal system, provides an agile,
high-velocity network without hard dependencies.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is an example of supportive streams
becoming core streams. After an initial experiment in 2002, Amazon
assessed its infrastructure capabilities as a viable business in 2003 and
officially spun AWS out as a core set of public-facing capabilities in
2004.3 AWS’s capabilities remained a supportive function for
Amazon.com, became a core function for Amazon Web Services, and is a
supportive function underpinning its customers’ infrastructure
capabilities.
Classification across the core to supportive spectrum, like
developmental/operational, can be helpful for considering relative
investment (e.g., in marketing, branding, pricing, cost management, etc.),
but it can also be detrimental in the wrong environment. If core streams
hold relatively higher prestige than supportive, there will be negative

-- 299 of 353 --

downstream effects as contributors will become aware of a stratification
that often breeds conflict or resentment. There can’t be first-class and
second-class value streams in a coherent value stream network.
The value of these classification spectrums is in gaining a clear
understanding of streams throughout your organization to enable better
conversations and decisions. Because digital value streams are invisible
without a proper model to represent them, it’s crucial we have a
productive set of terms to talk about and think about that model. Even
more important for our purposes with Flow Engineering, we need to be
able to improve the performance of value streams, so using a model that
allows for and enables change is essential.
We’ll now illustrate how the developmental/operational spectrum
along with the core/supportive spectrum can be used to visually plot
streams as a connected value stream network. This allows you to
visualize your organization as interconnected value streams and better
understand and communicate dependencies and cross-organizational
flow.
Value Stream Network Mapping
We can create a simple map of the value stream network without getting
into the details of each value stream, as depicted in Figure 14.4. This
shows how interdependent organizations are and can help identify
structural opportunities or inefficiencies. In a Value Stream Network
Map, we show value streams as interconnected points in a basic diagram
to understand how and where streams interconnect and to show
supporting services like legal, HR, procurement, etc. Creating a Value
Stream Network Map gives you a clear, visual artifact that can help
clarify high-level conversations and planning.

-- 300 of 353 --

FIGURE 14.4: A Value Stream Network Map
The value stream network can represent interconnected streams at macro scale.
To map the Value Stream Network, we use the two dimensions of
developmental to operational and core to supportive to create a map of
the larger value stream network. Plotting streams on a graph in this way
is similar to a Wardley Map, typically used to show capabilities along a
value chain.4 But our focus is not on
what is consumed and produced by
the organization. We’re concerned with the
how; the value streams. For
the purposes of illustrating flow, each node on the map represents a
value stream that can shift along these dimensions, rather than
capabilities that evolve toward commoditization. These allow us to show
interconnections and to visualize the full organization. This type of
large-scale map can help us visualize dependencies between streams, but
it can also help us define, plan, and discuss larger-scale strategy.
To create a value stream network, begin by identifying the streams or
services that you want to include in the map. We recommend starting
small rather than trying to map the entire enterprise. If you intend to
progress through all the maps of Flow Engineering, it will be easier to
focus on a relevant section of the network rather than the entire
organization. Distribute these streams as nodes along the vertical axis
from	
core at the top (value streams delivering the reasons external

-- 301 of 353 --

customers choose you) to
supportive at the bottom (value streams that
provide internal support and enable sustained success), as shown in
Figure 14.5.
FIGURE 14.5: The Y Axis of a Value Stream Network Map
Supportive to core denotes proximity to external customers.
Next, position these value streams horizontally based on where they
fall on the
developmental to
operational spectrum, as shown in Figure
14.6. This dimension reflects the amount of inevitable variation and the
performance focus in the value stream. Value streams that perform the
same activity consistently, again and again, are operational and should
emphasize efficiency by minimizing variation. Those that involve
creatively conceiving new ideas are developmental and necessarily
include significant variation. Developmental streams should emphasize
effectiveness rather than efficiency.

-- 302 of 353 --

FIGURE 14.6: The X Axis of the Value Stream Network Map
Developmental to operational denotes the performance focus of the stream.
Next, show the main interdependencies in the value stream by
linking these nodes together. To keep the diagram simpler, only show the
main dependencies, as per Figure 14.7.
FIGURE 14.7: Connections Show Dependencies between Value Streams
Figures 14.8 and 14.9 (see page 238) are value stream networks
showing part of an organization’s interconnected value streams. These
diagrams provide a way to strategize about how changes to the
organization would impact activity and outcomes. For example, Figure

-- 303 of 353 --

14.8 shows how the organization may shift its focus and investment to
further operationalize its internal development platform. This may be
motivated by needs that can be described directly on the map for clarity,
such as reduced costs and variability, or decreasing disruptive incidents
and improving stability.
FIGURE 14.8: Example Value Stream Network Map Showing Shift in Internal Dev Platform
Streams can shift performance focus to respond to needs or conditions, such as an
increase in stability or cost reduction.

-- 304 of 353 --

FIGURE 14.9: Example Value Stream Network Map Showing Developmental Shift
Streams can shift to focus more on innovation or new capabilities, which has
implications for how they’re measured and managed.
The Value Stream Network Map can help you illustrate and discuss
plans for, and the impact of, shifting along the
developmental/operational spectrum. Figure 14.9 shows how a seemingly
standard capability provided through a customer success platform could
shift to adopt AI technology.
The experimental nature of these technologies would require a shift
to the left to behave more developmentally. Using the map, you can
discuss what this might require in terms of new measurements or
methods to drive, support, and sustain the shift.
A value stream network is a map of your company, a set of
relationships between value streams and their dependencies. Compared
to the typical organizational chart, it’s a depiction of how work is
performed and supported throughout the organization. Rather than a
hierarchical representation of roles and responsibilities relative to
leadership, it represents activity relative to internal and external
customers.
Thinking back to the Checkbox Project mentioned in Part 1, a value
stream network could help you define and disentangle the necessary

-- 305 of 353 --

interactions involved in that effort. Thinking back to Sharon’s case at
Bolt Global, the network view could help her illustrate a larger-scale
opportunity to improve flow across the organization. Having a spectrum
of mapping techniques at your disposal as you work to engineer flow
across organizations allows you to zoom out to the macro view and
zoom in to the micro view where you see value.
Learning Communities
Dojos
As explained in the paper “Getting Started with Dojos,” dojos are “a space
that is designed to host an immersive learning experience where full-
stack teams come together to learn.”5 Ross Clanton summarized the
power of dojos to improve a team’s performance: “The purpose of the
dojo is learning, and we prioritize that over everything else. That means
you have to slow down to speed up. Over the six weeks, they will not
speed up. But they will get faster as an outcome of the process.”6 A dojo
experience can be more or less intensive depending on the needs and
expected return on investment, but the value of stepping away from the
work and learning new skills pays off considerably over time. The flow-
related learning conducted in a dojo could involve working through a
fictional end-to-end case or doing a real-life application within the
organization. It can present opportunities to learn facilitation skills,
adopt more sophisticated mapping techniques, improve data collection
and synthesis, apply countermeasures, or even design a custom-tailored
version of Flow Engineering that best fits the local organizational
culture.
Communities of Practice

-- 306 of 353 --

Along with value streams, one of the networks that can reach across your
organization are communities of practice, groups that assemble to share
learning, ideas, and challenges. These were popularized as Guilds in
Spotify’s 2012 article “Scaling Agile @ Spotify.”7 This can start as small as
two individuals meeting on an informal basis and grow into a large
group with regular meetings and formalized deliverables like standards,
playbooks, and documentation.
While you’re starting out with Flow Engineering, you can leverage
communities of practice outside the walls of your organization to ask
questions, hear experience reports, and connect with like-minded
individuals. The Flow Collective is one such community dedicated to
improving collective flow across organizations, and it’s a resource you
can leverage as you start your journey with Flow Engineering.
CASE STUDY
The Flow Collective
The Flow Collective is a public community founded during the lockdown periods of the
COVID-19 pandemic response. It was created as an online venue for conversations about
flow among friends who would otherwise discuss the topic (and others) over a drink or a
meal.
The platform is simple: Slack for asynchronous communication, a weekly Zoom call to
talk in real time, and a Mural board to serve as a Lean Coffee platform. The Flow Collective
emphasizes several key aspects in its approach to fostering creativity and learning:
• Stepping Away from Your Context: It provides a space separate from the traditional
work environment, allowing for free and innovative thinking without the constraints of
workplace norms and expectations. This separation encourages creativity and sharing
ideas without the fear of judgment or the need to adhere to specific workplace
behaviors.
• Share and Listen: Members of the Flow Collective engage in open, dynamic
conversations every week where diverse ideas and perspectives are shared. This open
dialogue brings together a variety of experiences and viewpoints, sparking new insights
and realizations.

-- 307 of 353 --

• Support from Experienced Peers: The collective consists of individuals with
significant experience and knowledge, offering a rich environment for learning and
growth. The sharing of ideas among these experienced peers not only fosters a sense
of community but also provides a platform for mutual support and encouragement.
• Learn in Public: The concept of learning in public is central to the Flow Collective.
Members are encouraged to share their developing ideas in a supportive community,
allowing for exploration, feedback, and refinement. This process of public learning and
sharing facilitates a continuous cycle of improvement and innovation.
• Collect Learning as a Shared Reference: The knowledge and insights gained
through the collective’s discussions and interactions are not just for individual benefit;
they are collected and shared among members. This shared pool of learning not only
serves as a valuable reference for everyone, enhancing the collective’s overall
knowledge and understanding over time but also provides a crowdsourced body of
knowledge.
Communities like the Flow Collective foster a culture of open communication,
continuous learning, and creative collaboration. By making a space to step into, away from
traditional workplace structures and dynamics, members can share, learn, and develop their
understanding of flow with a group of like-minded supporters. You can follow the example
of the Flow Collective to craft your own community inside or outside your organization. And
if you’re reading this, you’re officially invited to join the Flow Collective as a forum to learn,
share, and grow at FlowCollective.org.
Flow Enabling Teams
To foster, support, and scale Flow Engineering practices throughout an
organization, we encourage the model of enabling teams defined in
Team Topologies by Matthew Skelton and Manuel Pais: “Enabling teams
have a strongly collaborative nature; they strive to understand the
problems and shortcomings of stream-aligned teams in order to provide
effective guidance.”8
By pairing with and supporting stream-aligned (and platform) teams,
flow-enabling teams can help teams and streams realign, refocus, reveal
constraints, and unblock flow. Despite the value of these activities, busy
teams struggle to take time away from the work to improve the work.

-- 308 of 353 --

Stephen Covey used the analogy of sharpening the saw to illustrate
the value of taking time for improvement efforts: “They take some time,
but in the long run, they save us a great deal of time. We must never get
too busy sawing to take time to sharpen the saw, never too busy driving
to take time to get gas.”9
A flow-enabling team that works with multiple teams across an
organization gradually builds skill and insight from seeing many teams,
scenarios, and issues. They can also invest in learning from peer
networks to develop a heightened sense of common and shared
challenges across the organization and across other organizations.
FIGURE 14.10: Flow Enabling Team Interactions with Product Streams
A flow-enabling team works with value stream aligned teams to help them learn,
map, and address flow issues. It can support either reactively (A) or proactively (B).
Flow-enabling teams can work either reactively or proactively with
streams and stream-aligned teams. Reactive interventions could be
triggered by events like the loss of a team member, reorganization, new
needs arising, or a realization that metrics are moving in the wrong
direction. The flow-enabling team can work to stabilize the team or
elevate their performance depending on the need. Proactively, the flow-
enabling team can engage with teams for regular baselining, sharing
insights from other parts of the organization, sharing new learning and
techniques, or training and building Flow Engineering capabilities
within the engaged team. A Flow Engineering team can assist teams
across the organization to improve performance in a number of ways:

-- 309 of 353 --

• The Flow Engineering team can facilitate mapping workshops
under a full or partial program, as well as train and coach
improvement efforts. This is a primary mode of interaction with
other teams.
• Working together for a period of time, the teams could develop and
test new methods and practices, including new mapping techniques
or countermeasures. These can be incorporated in the portfolio of
offerings and capabilities provided to other teams.
• The Flow Engineering team can publish templates and other
resources, as well as documentation, training, case studies, videos,
etc. that enable other teams to perform Flow Engineering activities
within their own teams or with others.
A dedicated Flow Engineering team does not need to be formalized
from day one, and it could begin as just one person’s periodic investment
in better performance. It can also become a powerful and permanent
capability that can scale its impact throughout your entire organization.
Dependency Management
Many of the issues you’ll encounter in current state flow are linked to dependencies,
and their impact is significant. Troy Magennis, who has produced extensive work on
data, forecasting, and measurement, calculated the odds of on-time delivery in a team
with five dependencies (other teams, approvals, etc.) at one in thirty-two and stated,
“Every dependency you can remove DOUBLES your chances of successful on-time
delivery.”10
Piloting Flow Engineering (Bridging the On-Ramp Gap)

-- 310 of 353 --

Everyone wants improvement, but it’s not easy to justify investment,
especially when it involves change. Leading from the inside out means
that the approach has to meet people where they are and align to where
they want to go. To effectively get improvement efforts off the ground,
it’s not enough to simply propose Flow Engineering or any approach—
regardless of how compelling—if there’s no capacity or cognitive load to
invest in it. We’ve aimed to make it as easy as possible to see a path to
and through Flow Engineering. But we know that easy and valuable is
often not enough to drive change.
There are two powerful and easy ways to get started with Flow
Engineering.
1. Conduct a conversational Outcome Map: As the Lean decision
filter stated in Chapter 10, “Value trumps flow.” It’s critical to
repeatedly reestablish the valuable target you’re seeking to
achieve and to do so together with everyone involved to ensure
alignment and shared clarity. In either one-on-one or group
conversations, you can establish whether Flow Engineering could
help address needs by taking notes and categorizing them into
the outcome discovery categories explained in Chapter 5. If the
conversation raises issues with throughput, friction,
misalignment, visibility, etc., you may have an opportunity to
leverage Flow Engineering as a countermeasure.
2. When a desired outcome is clear, talk through what it might look
like, the benefits to stakeholders, obstacles, and next steps. You
can mentally, physically, or digitally create a conversational
Outcome Map in a single thirty-minute meeting that helps you
get on track, get back on track, or stay on track. The advantage of
a conversational map is that you can present it to your
counterpart and ask, “Did I hear this right?”

-- 311 of 353 --

To maximize your odds of progress and success, remember the
following:
• Everyone has their own obligations and incentives. Make sure your
efforts clearly align to a high-value business goal, initiative, target,
or objective.
• Make it clear how improving flow, quality, or value directly
contributes to what the business values. You can use an Outcome
Map to plot and share this.
• Use the map as a reference to either guide a conversation with
peers and leaders or share it directly in a conversation to serve as a
visual asset.
• Create an Outcome Map together with key stakeholders in order to
gather direct perspectives and leverage the IKEA effect.
You can also use Flow Engineering to get started with Flow
Engineering. First, define a target outcome: Let’s say we aim to improve
lead time for a single pilot team by 30%. If a thorough mapping process
takes six to eight hours, that’s a modest investment of time to deliver
that level of improvement. This can be a way to start the adoption of
Flow Engineering and scale the impact of improvement efforts.
Begin by identifying a pilot team and working through the maps. By
starting with a single pilot team at first, we can demonstrate value and
success quickly. Notice that our target outcome is
not to implement
Flow Engineering. Why not? Flow Engineering is a means to an end,
rather than an end in itself. The best way to pilot Flow Engineering is to
use it to benefit your business. Pick a real problem, a real opportunity,
and something that aligns to high-level objectives. Put the maps to work
and then pick another target. Flow Engineering isn’t something you
implement and roll out; it’s something you do and practice.

-- 312 of 353 --

One of the first challenges for the pilot team is understanding how
high-level streams of workflow through the organization today.
Examples of high-level streams include a major version release workflow,
partner engagement flow, or any other key sequence of activities that
delivers on the company’s primary business model. Even if individuals
believe this is well understood, the exercise of making this visible opens
opportunities for new discoveries about how the organization delivers
value. Visualizing one work stream within the org will often lead to
identifying adjacent work that may form an extension of the same value
stream or another related stream.
The next objective of the pilot team is to identify obvious constraints
and waste to generate quick wins. These quick wins will not only feed
our motivation and sense of progress but also fuel inspiring
communication with others who can join, support, and expand the
efforts.
When we talk about the changes being introduced, they could be of
many types, but they are often disruptive, and their value can be hidden
by delayed feedback. We need to work with the teams to identify how to
make the change valuable and visible for them. Having maps available to
share for visibility, input, and feedback can spark and build momentum
that can lead to mapping other streams, other outcomes, and larger
impacts. This is the start of the flow flywheel.
Starting the Flow Flywheel
The challenge of investing time in Flow Engineering is that most teams
operate at or above full capacity, making it challenging to step away and
try something new. This is why we suggest fitting mapping into existing
time boxes like retrospectives or off-site meetings. With a minimal initial
investment, you can create a quick win that provides enough capital
(time, space, enthusiasm) to invest in the next one. Once progress has
begun, you can continue to reinvest and grow the impact. Flow

-- 313 of 353 --

Engineering can prepare the conditions to grow substantial flow
improvement capabilities and, once started, can serve as a flywheel for
continued and larger-scale change. Figure 14.11 shows the stages of
building momentum, described next.
FIGURE 14.11: The Flywheel of Flow Engineering
1. Initial investment: Stepping away from the work is the best way
to understand and improve it. This stage is often the most
challenging, as it requires overcoming inertia and resistance to
change. Flow Engineering mapping is intended to be fast (and
thus cheap) and interactive (and thus engaging). It can also be an
exercise incorporated in other team improvement activities, such
as retrospectives. Outcome Mapping can be useful to connect
your efforts to benefits that the larger organization is seeking.
2. Quick Wins: Your first victories of increased alignment and
visibility can power your initial progress. Often, Current State
Mapping reveals opportunities that can eliminate huge amounts
of waste overnight, just by minimizing non–value-adding activity
or delays. Future State Maps serve as an artifact to build support
and alignment. Mapping builds cohesion and engagement within
and across teams.

-- 314 of 353 --

3. Improved Performance: The initial investments start to pay
off, leading to enhanced efficiency, productivity, or quality. This
improvement is the first sign that the flywheel is starting to spin.
Celebrating early wins and sharing learning can build support and
progress. Measures of progress in the Flow Roadmap become
metrics and milestones you can share to demonstrate the value of
your efforts. The clarity of tight-scope improvement actions
makes it easier to focus, execute, and deliver change.
4. Increased Capacity, Capability, and Time: As performance
improves, it can lead to more available capacity and time. This
might be due to more efficient processes, less rework, or fewer
interruptions. The organization can do more with the same or
fewer resources.
5. Further Investment: With more available time and capacity, the
organization can invest further in innovative improvements, data
collection, and the development of new capabilities. Available
capacity can be dedicated to repaying technical debt, playbooks,
platform development, and other enabling capabilities.
6. Scaling Up and Out: Learning can be shared more broadly
with other teams, partners, and dependencies. Focus can be
expanded to new constraints and new target outcomes. Value
Stream Management can enable more sophisticated
measurement, greater visibility, and greater impact.
7. Sustained Momentum and Growth: As this cycle continues,
the organization experiences sustained momentum, where each
improvement fuels further improvements. This is the flywheel
effect in full swing, where initial hard work leads to a self-
sustaining cycle of growth and advancement. At this point,
improvement is a natural part of work. Work item profile (flow)
distribution tracks time spent on each distinct type of work, and

-- 315 of 353 --

metrics capturing throughput and value realization track ROI.
This allows for continued adaptation and evolution.
Conclusion
Part 3 has covered a broad range of concepts and techniques to enable
your first steps with Flow Engineering and to support deeper learning
and broader application over time. Chapter 10 began by sharing guiding
principles for engineering flow. We worked through the practical
application of leading flow improvement, beyond the maps and
mapping, in Chapter 11. Common traps that teams are likely to
encounter were the focus of Chapter 12. In Chapter 13, we looked at
Value Stream Management as a practice of ongoing performance
improvement. With Chapter 14, we revisited our initial problem of scale
by exploring how to effectively scale your efforts with Flow Engineering.
Together, these provide a portfolio of concepts and practices that we
hope will support your efforts to improve flow across your organization.
We appreciate the great challenge you’re taking on, tackling the problem
of scale in your organization. With these tools, you’re ready to kick-start
your flow flywheel and foster value, clarity, and flow, even within a
challenging enterprise environment.

-- 316 of 353 --

Key Takeaways
• Quick wins with Flow Engineering may span multiple teams with common flow
challenges, amplifying the impact of mapping with a single pilot team.
• Dojos and communities of practice can allow you to rapidly develop and improve
Flow Engineering skills and capabilities on a large scale.
• A Flow Engineering enabling team can work across a large organization to facilitate,
intervene, and share learning at scale.
• With minimal initial investment, Flow Engineering can power a flywheel that
continually improves flow across the organization.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 317 of 353 --

Conclusion
“We can’t impose our will on a system. We can listen to
what the system tells us and discover how its properties
and our values can work together to bring forth
something much better than could ever be produced by
our will alone.”
DONELLA H. MEADOWS,
Thinking in Systems
BEYOND ANY SPECIFIC PROGRAM, practice, or set of principles, Flow
Engineering is an effort to improve the conditions and performance of
one of the most challenging work environments: complex, global,
increasingly digital enterprise organizations. Enterprises at such a scale
lead to distance between people, perspectives, and purposes. This
distance creates disengagement, disorientation, and distraction. These
conditions make it difficult to align and collaborate and to do our best
work.
Many approaches, systems, frameworks, and programs exist to
address these conditions, but few find an actionable balance between
prescriptive and generative. Many solutions leave gaps that make it
difficult to onboard, visualize, and align with the current state or future
targets. We draw inspiration from cybernetics, a view that applies at any
scale, from individuals to ecosystems. To enable effective action under
these conditions, we must enable the elements of action: value, clarity,
and flow.

-- 318 of 353 --

Flow Engineering provides a means to develop these elements of
action through the enabling constraints of five sequential collaborative
mapping practices:
1. Outcome Mapping: Defining a clear target outcome.
2. Current State Mapping: Identifying the constraint in the
current state.
3. Dependency Mapping: Analyzing the constraint preventing
the target outcome.
4. Future State Mapping: Defining what will deliver the target
outcome.
5. Flow Roadmap: Prioritizing key action items to deliver the
target outcome.
When we know the constraints and complexity affecting our capacity
for change and improvement, Flow Engineering is easy to start. It
leverages the best of prescriptive and generative approaches. It works at
small and large scale and is easily tailored, open, extendable, and
adaptable. We hope by this point you’ve put it into practice, but if you
haven’t, you’re welcome to join us at FlowCollective.org to start at any
time.
The simplest representation of Flow Engineering traces the
cybernetic loop of value, clarity, and flow with three questions:
1. What is our most valuable target?
2. What is holding us back from it?
3. What will we do to address that?
If you’re thinking of these questions, you’ve already started to
improve flow across your organization. Simple, but not easy. The
structure of Flow Engineering is there to make the process
straightforward, clear, and actionable.

-- 319 of 353 --

There’s a great deal that needs to go your way to succeed with a large-
scale change effort. There’s very little you need to gain a quick win,
demonstrate success, and start the flywheel of progress. Write up a
simple conversational Outcome Map in your next meeting and share it
to validate your understanding. Remix OKRs into an Outcome Map to
see them from a different perspective. Map the flow you spend most of
your time in and see if you find delay or waste you could address
yourself. Once you do, make sure you step back and celebrate your
efforts and your learning—and while you’re at it, tell us how it went and
what you learned!
Writing this book has revealed how much more there is that we don’t
yet know. There’s far more beyond the horizon of this book: knowledge
and practices to expand the depth, breadth, and impact of your efforts.
To continue your pursuits, explore and dig deeper—you may find a great
deal of value in the following areas we couldn’t accommodate in the
limited scope of the book:
• Cost of Delay: Don Reinertsen has proposed this as an über metric
for flow along with Throughput Accounting.1
• Wardley mapping (Simon Wardley) for large-scale strategic
understanding and evolution of architecture and capabilities.
•	
Leading the Transformation and	
Engineering the Digital
Transformation by Gary Gruver for specific technical and practice
interventions for continuous delivery.
• “The Project to Product Transformation” to illustrate changes to
operating models, incentives, and priorities.2
• Cynefin (Dave Snowden) to inform ways of approaching various
operating environments and conditions.
• Hoshin Kanri (policy depoloyment) to strategically deploy Value
Stream Management and align tactics and operations.3

-- 320 of 353 --

• Look to the Poppendiecks, Meadows, Capra, Deming, Senge, etc. to
delve deeper into systems thinking, flow, and performance
improvement theory and practice.
We hope that with this book we’ve not only enabled you to improve
flow, but inspired you to explore further, in turn inspiring others to join
your journey. Thank you for joining ours.
Key Takeaways
• Flow engineering is a human activity. The goal is to deliver value continuously,
sustainably, and collaboratively.
• To grow the influence and effects of flow engineering, you need to consider the
impacts, incentives, and systems at play across the organization.
• You can leverage proven Lean and scalable change-adoption methods to grow Flow
Engineering.
• You can effectively scale Flow Engineering via enabling teams, dojos, and
communities of practice.
• FlowCollective.org is a global community of flow-focused individual changemakers
who can support your individual journey.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 321 of 353 --

Appendix
Value, Clarity, and Flow Detail
Figure A.1 presents a more detailed view of the three elements of action:
value, clarity, and flow.
FIGURE A.1: Value, Clarity, and Flow

-- 322 of 353 --

Applying Little’s Law
Little’s Law is a principle from queue theory that provides a simple
calculation to evaluate flow in value streams. It helps you understand, for
example, how long you can expect to wait for items in your backlog to be
delivered based on current performance. Little’s Law relates the number
of items waiting to be processed (L) to the average arrival/departure rate
(λ) and the average wait time of an item within the system (W). The law
is expressed as L = λW.
In knowledge work, it can be used to relate the amount of work in
progress (WIP) to the time to complete this work. It can help you
calculate optimal WIP throughout your value streams by showing the
combined impact of ingress work, WIP, and throughput. To calculate
this correctly, you must ensure you are familiar with the average values
for your value stream prior to performing calculations: lead time (W),
work in progress (L), and throughput (λ).
As Daniel Vacanti pointed out, being able to use it reliably requires
consistent measurement and “looks at the past, not the future.”1 Little’s
Law represents a mathematical ideal that depends on a number of
assumptions:
• This law holds only for value streams operating at a relatively
steady state. As an example, the WIP at the start of the week should
match the WIP at the week’s end.
• The average rates of both incoming and outgoing work through the
value stream should be equal, otherwise throughput can’t be
accurately quantified, i.e., work items can’t be injected or
abandoned midstream.
Due to the high amount of variability in knowledge work, these
assumptions rarely hold true. But the general relationship between WIP,

-- 323 of 353 --

lead time, and throughput is directionally correct: if you want to increase
throughput, work to reduce WIP and/or lead time.
Components of Little’s Law
• L: Average number (load) of work items (features, bugs,
improvements, etc.) in process (WIP) in the value stream.
• λ: Throughput of work items through (initiated and completed)
the value stream.
• W: Average time a task spends in the value stream, from being
initiated to being enabled for use. You can think of W here as
customer wait from request to fulfillment.
Scenario: Applying Little’s Law in a Value Stream Context
• Observation Period: 1 month.
• Work Items Completed: 60 work items.
• Work in Progress: On average, 15 work items are in different stages
of the value stream at any given time.
STEPS
• Calculate the arrival rate (λ): If 60 items are completed in a month,
the arrival rate λ is 60 items/month.
• Calculate the average time an item spends in the system (W):
Little’s Law can be rearranged to W = L/λ. With (load) L = 15 items
and (arrival) λ = 60 items/month. W = 15/60 months = 0.25 months.
• This means, on average, a work item takes about 0.25 months (or
about 7.5 days) from start to finish in the system.
INSIGHTS AND ACTIONS
• Backlog Completion: Knowing throughput can help you think
about a backlog in terms of when it could be delivered: If each work
item takes 60 days to be delivered (W), and you have five items in

-- 324 of 353 --

progress at a time (L), it will take you 6.5 years to clear out a 200-
item backlog.
• Bottlenecks: If the team finds the average time (W) too long, they
can investigate the constraint in the process. Are items getting
stuck in code review? Is there a delay in testing?
• Capacity: If W is high, it might indicate a need for more capacity
or a change in the development process.
• Predictability: Knowing W helps predict delivery times,
improving the team’s ability to make commitments, but only if flow
remains consistent.
• Process Improvement: If the team aims to reduce W, they can
experiment with different approaches, like limiting work in
progress, to see how it affects the average completion time.
Applying Metrics to Value Stream Management
FIGURE A.2: Calculating Speed: Lead, Wait, and Active Times
Lead time is the most critical metric in flow improvement for three
key reasons seldom discussed:
• Time is the one dimension of work you have the least control over.
Lead time is the most complete representation of the fact that time

-- 325 of 353 --

is always passing, for you and your customers.
• Lead time encourages collaboration. It encompasses every cross-
functional group involved in value creation, unifying each
individual contributor under a collective metric.
• Lead time represents the most complete closed loop of learning
from customers. It allows you to understand the earliest point you
could deliver value based on an insight gained from your last
customer-impacting change.
The biggest misconception of lead time is that it’s just the total time
that you spend doing the work, which is incorrect. Lead time, by
standard definition, actually includes the time that the work waited plus
the cycle time for each stage that you worked on that item. So, if you had
a user story that was waiting for eight months, and you only spent two
months actually developing it, your total lead time ends up being ten
months, because we are taking the wait time and the cycle time of each
stage together to give you the actual lead time because we are thinking in
terms of customer outcomes.
FIGURE A.3: Cycle Time Includes All Value-Added and Non–Value-Added Time Composing
Each Stage
Cycle time actually includes the time actively developing the work
item along with all the delays, rework, distractions, and operational
activities conducted in the course of each stage. A lot of waste can hide
in there, but we rarely invest in zooming in to that detail because it’s not
necessary or valuable. We simply ask contributors what percentage of the

-- 326 of 353 --

time in each stage is value-added time. Time they’re able to actively
develop the value of the work item.
It’s not uncommon for this percentage to be very low, and it should
be expected to be low at first. The reason to measure it isn’t to evaluate it
at its current level but to establish a baseline for improvement and an
understanding of the ROI potential of improvement.
The image above illustrates how we calculate quality, which is the
percent that is complete and accurate. If we break down the definition of
this metric, it’s really how complete and accurate the work was that
passed through the various stages, or how many items passed through
one stage without needing to be returned for rework or clarification.
At the very beginning of the development process, a product owner
or business analyst is typically responsible for gathering requirements
and writing user stories. These become work items, which are what the
development team then ends up working on. Even an excellent business
analyst may only manage to write a user story that hits about 95% of all
of the various scenarios and edge cases that need to be addressed. It then
gets handed off to a developer. About 5% of the time there are not
enough requirements or there’s information that is fundamentally
missing from the story. At that point, the developer is blocked, and the
work actually has to go back to the business analyst.
This happens very often in the DevOps space. The problem that we
have is how to measure that and keep track of how often work is being
sent back. That scenario can take place not only in the development
stage but sometimes even at the testing phase, where someone’s
completed development, but from a testing perspective, there have been
major issues found, so the work gets sent back.
That is where percent complete and accurate (%C&A) comes into the
picture and why it is so important. This measure shows what percentage
of the work in each of your stages was completed correctly and
accurately and did not need to be returned. Ideally, each piece of work

-- 327 of 353 --

would pass from one stage to the next without introducing a defect, but
we know that in real-life scenarios and in practice, defects can be
introduced at any stage.
The later stages are dependent on the quality of the work in the
earlier stages, which means that business analysts really need to be
writing clear user stories, including all of the various edge cases. The
developer then has to make sure that they are developing the story
accurately so that when it gets to testing there are no major issues. As
such, we need to make sure that the quality of work is up to par at every
single stage.
Let’s take one more look at that last image (Figure A.4). You’ll see we
have our actual percent complete and accurate for planning, which is
about 90%; for building, it’s at 50%; and then for testing, it’s at 70%. So,
how do we read that number, which indicates the likelihood that a single
piece of work will never have to be reworked in its journey? We can see
that our final complete and accurate metric is 31.5%, which is the product
of the actual complete and accurate metrics of the planning, building,
and testing stages.
FIGURE A.4: Calculating Quality: Percent Complete & Accurate

-- 328 of 353 --

With customers who are effectively using Value Stream Maps today,
that final number lives somewhere around 15% to 20%, although it’s not
uncommon to see teams new to Value Stream Management with rolled
%C&A under 5%.
Calculating the ROI of Flow Engineering
If you don’t currently have clear performance data on your workflow, a
clear picture of what it looks like, and a clear path to better, wouldn’t you
like to have that ASAP? Let’s say after mapping you identify three high-
priority, relatively simple improvements to implement right away. It will
likely take at least three months to see measurable progress. Then, with
three more months of progress and operation, you’ll have enough data
and experience with the current state that you can map it again and look
to a new outcome. In six months, you’ll have made enough progress that
you’ll have a new desired outcome, and will have found new bottlenecks
to identify and tackle.
In practice, Outcome Mapping requires at least one two-hour session
to go from scratch to a fully formed map ready for action. We can see in
Figure A.5 a very extensive Outcome Map, which covers goals and pains,
values and principles, prioritization, and experiment definition. As you
go from the raw input toward insight, you can rearrange the maps as you
like and easily export them to be shared throughout the organization.

-- 329 of 353 --

FIGURE A.5: Example Map Board in Progress
Since knowledge work is increasingly done across time zones rather
than shared offices, collaborative online mapping has moved from a
bonus to a necessity. With Flow Engineering we’re concerned with
improving the flow of work in the next three to six months within a
specific value stream. Our aim is to not only improve operations but
outcomes. Common desired outcomes we’ve seen in Flow Engineering
efforts with clients and partners include:
• Deliver software three times more often.
• Deploy changes to test environments ten times faster.
• Recover from production issues five times faster.
• Reduce production defects by half.
• Reduce variability by half.
One reason that teams (especially remote teams) may hesitate to
carve out time for a mapping exercise is that they are afraid to set aside
or request sufficient time for the teams to meet. This is a perfect example
of false economies, and we need to counter that tendency clearly.

-- 330 of 353 --

The highest-paid members of any organization are the executive
leadership team. But those are also often the teams that most regularly
have long team off-sites for thinking and planning and multi-hour
meetings each week to plan and strategize. Thinking takes time.
Communication takes time. Time costs money. But the cost of
inadequate thinking and communication vastly outweighs the up-front
cost of thinking correctly from the outset.
The amount of time, money, energy, and goodwill that are burned
through ineffective organizational activity is certainly hundreds of
billions, if not trillions, of dollars globally. This effect is often described
as expending organizational energy as heat instead of as work. Terms like
“thrashing” are also used to describe the activity of staying busy without
having an optimal impact.
A perfect example of thrashing is people whose calendars are filled
with thirty-minute meetings pertaining to a huge number of parallel
initiatives. Such meetings leave little time to accomplish real work, and
even with buffer time, it takes an average of twenty-three minutes and
fifteen seconds to effectively “get back to work.”2 Parallel projects
invariably drag on for far longer and yield far lower quality than
selectively taking up projects and completing them as quickly as possible
before taking on new work.
We can estimate direct and indirect costs of a member in an IT
organization being brought into a meeting at $125 an hour (opportunity
cost could be higher). For the mapping exercises described in this book,
it’s reasonable that they might involve eight people each. Some exercises,
like Dependency Mapping, may not be required depending on what’s
discovered in the earlier stages. This allows us to estimate a cost of
$1,000 per hour of Flow Engineering exercises.
To estimate the benefits, we can imagine that we are influencing the
activities of twenty knowledge workers who are each doing work valued
at $200,000 per year (value delivered should be greater than salaries

-- 331 of 353 --

paid). Our goals in Flow Engineering are to help the team increase their
throughput, improve quality, reduce attrition by increasing job
satisfaction, and reduce the chances of a project being unsuccessful.
Assuming they are all working full time, that team should be bringing $4
million of value per year.
TABLE A.1: Estimated Costs of Flow Engineering Exercises
Activity Typical Initial
Duration
Subsequent Time
Required
Estimated Annual
Cost
Outcome Mapping 3 hours 1 hour $4,000
Current State
Mapping
3 hours 1 hour $4,000
Dependency
Mapping
2 hours 1 hour $3,000
Future State
Mapping
2 hours 1 hour $3,000
Flow Roadmap 3 hours 1 hour $4,000
Total 13 hours 5 hours $18,000
If we can help the team to increase their throughput by 20% (the
common average improvement impact delivered by mapping3), that
$18,000 investment brings an equivalent of $800,000 benefit per year.
Similarly, if we can prevent 20% of their work from being wasted or
ineffective, that’s worth $800,000 per year. Reducing attrition also brings
financial benefits by averting the need to rehire, retrain, and burden the
team with disruption.
That back-of-the-envelope estimate shows a 44x benefit from these
activities. This cost accounting approach is obviously an
oversimplification, but it can be a useful way to illustrate the cost

-- 332 of 353 --

benefit. What’s also notable is that improvement in one stream is
typically replicable across multiple streams, magnifying the impact for
far less investment. Even if the costs were scaled by several times or the
benefits reduced significantly, this represents a remarkably positive effect
from investing this time.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 333 of 353 --

Glossary
The most critical aspect of language is that everyone involved uses and
understands it the same. We encourage you to discuss what critical
terms mean in your context and adjust them as needed. These are
provided from our context and can serve as a baseline if you need a
reference.
Customer: An entity that receives and perceives value from the value
stream’s outputs. This encompasses a broad range of recipients,
including external clients, internal stakeholders, and partners,
highlighting the diverse perspectives of value reception.
Cycle Time: The duration a stage requires for completion, including any
inherent delays or waiting periods.
Flow Efficiency: The proportion of active time (or touch time) compared
to overall lead time within the value stream, offering a gauge for
assessing the stream’s operational efficiency. This metric should be
placed in the context of blocks, interruptions, rework, and other
detrimental factors affecting performance. It can be refined to
emphasize the contribution of direct value-generating activities to
the stream’s performance.
Lead Time (or Flow Time): The comprehensive duration required for a
work item to traverse the value stream from start to finish. This
metric encapsulates all stages, including production, pauses, and
corrections, summarized simply as “hypothesis-to-happiness,”
signifying the journey from initiation to customer satisfaction.

-- 334 of 353 --

Percent Complete and Accurate (%C&A): A quality metric indicating the
proportion of work that progresses through a stage that meets
requirements, without the need for rework or clarification.
Stage: A single distinct activity within the value stream, typically
bounded by handoffs. For our purposes, analogous to step, process,
or set of tasks.
Segment: A subset of the value stream consisting of multiple stages.
Throughput (or Flow Velocity): The measure of a value stream’s output
over a given period, indicating the efficiency of delivery to customers.
The Theory of Constraints places this in relation to costs. Little’s Law
places this in the context of input relative to output.
Value: Ultimately defined by the recipient. The benefit that a product or
service provides to the customer.
Value-Added Time: The duration spent on activities that directly
contribute to the final product or service’s value from the customer’s
perspective.
Value Stream: An integrated series of activities designed to deliver a
specific outcome for a
customer who might be the final consumer,
stakeholder, or user. This stream encapsulates the journey of work
from initial need to the delivery of value.
Wait Time: The interval of inactivity between stages, characterized by
delays and queuing.
Waste: Activities within the value stream that consume resources
without enhancing the product or service’s value.
Work in Progress (WIP, Flow Load, or Work in Process): The quantity of
work items currently under process within the value stream, from
the inception of effort to completion. This is often tracked per stage
to highlight accumulation and reveal a constraint.
Work Item Profile (or Flow Distribution): The classification of work
items within the value stream, aiding in the assessment of work type
distribution and flow characteristics. Common profiles include

-- 335 of 353 --

features, experiments, bug fixes and issue remediation, flow
improvement, technical debt payment, and risk mitigation.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 336 of 353 --

Bibliography
“A Brief History of AWS.” Media Temple (blog). August 31, 2017. https://origin-
blog.mediatemple.net/cloud-hosting/brief-history-aws/.
“Accelerating Change.” The Natural Step (website). Accessed December 8, 2023.
https://thenaturalstep.org/approach/.
“Amazon: Number of Employees 2010-2023 | AMZN.” Macrotrends. Accessed November 30, 2023.
https://www.macrotrends.net/stocks/charts/AMZN/amazon/number-of-employees.
“The Biggest Startup: Eric Ries and GE Team Up to Transform Manufacturing.” GE News
(website). December 9, 2013. https://www.ge.com/news/reports/the-biggest-startup-eric-ries-
and-ge-team-up-to.
“Churchill and the Commons Chamber.” UK Parliament. Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://www.parliament.uk/about/living-
heritage/building/palace/architecture/palacestructure/churchill/.
“Peter F. Drucker Quotes.” QuoteFancy. Accessed November 29, 2023.
https://quotefancy.com/quote/888106/Peter-F-Drucker-The-purpose-of-an-organization-is-
to-enable-ordinary-humans-beings-to-do.
Ackoff, Russel L.
The Democratic Corporation: A Radical Prescription for Recreating Corporate
American and Rediscovering Success. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Anderson, David, Mark McCann, and Michael O’Reilly.
The Value Flywheel Effect: Power the
Future and Accelerate Your Organization to the Modern Cloud. Portland, OR: IT Revolution,
2022.
Anderson, Katie.
Learning to Lead, Leading to Learn: Lessons from Toyota Leader Isao Yoshino
on a Lifetime of Continuous Learning. Integrand Press, 2020.
Arnold, J. J., and Ö. Yüce. “Black Swan Farming Using Cost of Delay: Discover, Nurture and Speed
Up Delivery of Value.” Paper presented at the 2013 Agile Conference, Nashville, TN, 2013.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6612885.
Atkinson, John. “Manpower Strategies for Flexible Organisations.”
Personnel Management 16, no.
8 (August 1984): 28–31. https://www.stonebridge.uk.com/uploads/courses/566.pdf.
Barry, Quintin.
Moltke and His Generals: A Study in Leadership. Solihull: Helion & Company
Limited, 2015.

-- 337 of 353 --

Beck, Kent et al., “Manifesto for Agile Software Development.” AgileManifesto.org (website).
Accessed December 20, 2023. https://agilemanifesto.org/.
Blanchard, Ken. “No One of Us Is as Smart as All of Us.” Ken Blanchard Books. May 25, 2022.
https://www.kenblanchardbooks.com/no-one-of-us-is-as-smart-as-all-of-us/.
Bongers, F. J., W. A. Kosters, and B. G. Husslage. “How Long Does It Take To Refocus After Being
Interrupted? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Resumption Lag In Complex
Cognitive Activities.”
Human Factors, 61 no. 3 (2019): 420-439.
Boston Consulting Group. “Flipping the Odds of Digital Transformation Success.” October 2020.
https://web-assets.bcg.com/c7/20/907821344bbb8ade98cbe10fc2b8/bcg-flipping-the-odds-of-
digital-transformation-success-oct-2020.pdf.
Brooks, Frederick P.
The Mythical Man-Month,: Essays on Software Engineering. Boston:
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010.
Bryar, Colin, and Bill Carr.
Working Backwards: Insights, Stories, and Secrets from Inside
Amazon. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2021.
Buckingham, Marcus, and Curt Coffman.
First, Break All the Rules: What the World’s Greatest
Managers Do Differently. Washington, DC: Gallup Press, 2016.
Burrows, Mike. “#2MBM: Meaning before Metric, Measure before Method.” Agendashift. July 2,
2020. https://blog.agendashift.com/2020/07/02/2mbm-meaning-before-metric-measure-
before-method.
Capra, Fritjof, and Pier Luigi Luisi.
The Systems View of Life: A Unifying Vision. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Carpentier, Chantal Line. “New Economics for Sustainable Development Attention Economy.”
United Nations Economist Network. Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/attention_economy_feb.pdf.
Clanton, Ross, et al.
Getting Started with Dojos. Portland, OR: IT Revolution, 2019.
https://itrevolution.com/product/getting-started-with-dojos/.
Clanton, Ross, et al.
The Project to Product Transformation: Practical Guidance from Fourteen
Enterprise Journeys. Portland OR: IT Revolution, 2019.
https://itrevolution.com/product/project-to-product-transformation/.
Clark, Phil. “Inspect.” Presentation at the 2023 Flowtopia Conference in Las Vegas.
Cote, Michael.
Monolithic Transformation. O’Reilly Media, April 2019.
Cottmeyer, Mike. “LK2009 Anderson, Scotland, and Hathaway.” Leading Agile (website). 2009.
https://www.leadingagile.com/2009/05/lk2009-anderson-scotland-and-hathaway/.
Covey, Stephen.
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in Personal Change.
New York: Free Press, 2004.
Criscuolo, Paola, Ammon Salter, and Anne Ter Wal. “The Role of Proximity in Shaping
Knowledge Sharing in Professional Services Firms.” Paper presented at the Summer
Conference 2010 on “Opening Up Innovation: Strategy, Organization and Technology” at
Imperial College London Business School, June 16-18, 2010.

-- 338 of 353 --

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228681027_The_role_of_proximity_in_shaping_k
nowledge_sharing_in_professional_services_firms.
Cutler, John. “TBM 7/52: Two Bets.”
The Beautiful Mess (blog). January 26, 2023.
https://cutlefish.substack.com/p/tbm-752-two-bets.
Cutler, John. “TBM 34/52: Words Matter—Strategy & Certainty.”
The Beautiful Mess (blog).
August 3, 2022. https://cutlefish.substack.com/p/tbm-3452-words-matterstrategy-and.
Cutler, John. “TBM 245: The Magic Prioritization Trick.”
The Beautiful Mess (blog). September
30, 2023. https://cutlefish.substack.com/p/tbm-245-the-magic-prioritization.
Cynefin.io. “Constraints.” Accessed December 20, 2023. https://cynefin.io/wiki/Constraints.
DeGrandis, Dominica.
Making Work Visible: Exposing Time Theft to Optimize Work & Flow.
Portland, OR: IT Revolution Press, 2017.
Deming, W. Edwards.
Out of the Crisis. MIT Press, 1982.
Duhigg, Charles. “What Google Learned from Its Quest to Build the Perfect Team.”
New York
Times. February 25, 2016. https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/28/magazine/what-google-
learned-from-its-quest-to-build-the-perfect-team.html.
Forsgren, Nicole PhD, Jez Humble, and Gene Kim.
Accelerate: The Science of Lean Software and
DevOps: Building and Scaling High Performing Technology Organizations. Portland, OR: IT
Revolution, 2018.
Gabbert, Fiona, Lorraine Hope, and Ronald P. Fisher. “Protecting Eyewitness Evidence:
Examining the Efficacy of a Self-Administered Interview Tool.”
Law and Human Behavior 33,
no. 4 (August 2009): 298–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10979-008-9146-8.
Gallup. “Employee Engagement.” Accessed October 14, 2023.
https://www.gallup.com/394373/indicator-employee-engagement.aspx.
Gallup. “State of the Global Workplace: 2023 Report.” Accessed November 7, 2023.
https://www.gallup.com/workplace/349484/state-of-the-global-workplace.aspx.
Gilbreth, Frank, and L. M. Gilbreth.
Process Charts. New York: The American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, 1921. https://www.thegilbreths.com/resources/Gilbreth-Process-
Charts-1921.pdf.
Goldratt, Eliyahu.
The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement. North River Press, 2012.
Goldratt, Eliyahu.
The Haystack Syndrom: Sifting Information Out of the Data Ocean. North
River Press, 2006.
Grant, Adam. “Are You a Giver or a Taker?” TED Talk. Posted on January 24, 2017. 13:28.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YyXRYgjQXX0.
Greene, Jay. “Amazon’s Big Holiday Shopping Advantage: An In-House Shipping Network Swollen
by Pandemic-Fueled Growth.”
Washington Post. November 27, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/11/27/amazon-shipping-competitive-
threat/.
Hagemann, Bonnie, et al.
Trends in Executive Development 2021–2024: A Benchmark Report.
EDA Inc., 2024.

-- 339 of 353 --

Hagger, M. S., et al. “Autonomous and Controlled Motivational Regulations for Multiple Health-
Related Behaviors: Between- and Within-Participants Analyses.”
Health Psychology and
Behavioral Medicine 2, no. 1 (2014): 565–601. https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2014.912945.
Hern, Alex. “The Two-Pizza Rule and the Secret of Amazon’s Success.”
The Guardian. April 24,
2018. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2018/apr/24/the-two-pizza-rule-and-the-
secret-of-amazons-success.
Hines, Peter. “Value Stream Management.”
The International Journal of Logistics Management 9,
no. 1 ( January 1998): 25–42.
Humble, Jez, Joanne Molesky, and Barry O’Reilly.
Lean Enterprise: How High Performance
Organizations Innovate at Scale. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2015.
Kalbach, Jim.
Mapping Experiences: A Complete Guide to Customer Alignment Through
Journeys, Blueprints, and Diagrams. O'Reilly Media, 2021.
Katz, Judith H., and Frederick A. Miller.
Opening Doors to Teamwork and Collaboration: 4 Keys
That Change Everything. San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2013.
Kazempour, Kamran, et al. “The Checkbox Project: Learnings for Organizing for Outcomes.”
The
DevOps Enterprise Journal 5, no. 2 (Fall 2023). https://itrevolution.com/product/the-devops-
enterprise-journal-fall-2023/.
Kersten, Mik.
Project to Product: How to Survive and Thrive in the Age of Digital Disruption
with the Flow Framework. Portland, OR: IT Revolution Press, 2018.
Kim, Gene.
The Unicorn Project, A Novel about Developers, Digital Disruption, and Thriving in
the Age of Data. Portland, OR: IT Revolution, 2019.
Kim, Gene, and Steven J. Spear.
Wiring the Winning Organization: Liberating Our Collective
Greatness Through Slowification, Simplification, and Amplification. Portland, OR: IT
Revolution Press, 2023.
Kniberg, Henrik, and Anders Ivarsson.
Scaling Agile @ Spotify with Tribes, Squads, Chapters &
Guilds. October 2012. https://blog.crisp.se/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/SpotifyScaling.pdf.
Lewis, Michael.
Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company, 2003.
Liker, Jeffrey, and Gary Convis.
The Toyota Way to Lean Leadership: Achieving and Sustaining
Excellence through Leadership Development. McGraw Hill, 2011.
Lipmanowicz, Henri, and Keith McCandless. “15% Solutions: Discover and Focus on What Each
Person Has the Freedom and Resources to Do Now (20 min.).” Liberating Structures
(website). Accessed December 9, 2023. https://www.liberatingstructures.com/7-15-solutions/.
Magennis, Troy. “How Does Utilization Impact Lead-Time of Work?” Observable HQ (blog).
November 9, 2020. https://observablehq.com/@troymagennis/how-does-utilization-impact-
lead-time-of-work
Magennis, Troy. “Impact of Multiple Team Dependencies in Software Development.” Observable
HQ (blog). July 29, 2019. https://observablehq.com/@troymagennis/impact-of-multiple-team-
dependencies-in-software-developm.

-- 340 of 353 --

Mao, Andrew, et al. “An Experimental Study of Team Size and Performance on a Complex Task.”
PLoS ONE 11, no. 4 (April 2016). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0153048.
Mangot, Dave. “Make the Right Way the Easy Way.” CIO. October 24, 2019.
https://www.cio.com/article/217754/make-the-right-way-the-easy-way.html.
Mark, Gloria, Victor Gonzalez, and Justin Harris. “No Task Left Behind? Examining the Nature of
Fragmented Work.”
CHI ’05: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (April 2005): 321–330.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1054972.105501710.1145/1054972.1055017.
Martin, James.
The Great Transition: Using the Seven Disciplines of Enterprise Engineering to
Align People, Technology, and Strategy. New York: AMACOM Books, 1995.
Martin, Karen.
Clarity First: How Smart Leaders and Organizations Achieve Outstanding
Performance. New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2018.
Martin, Karen, and Mike Osterling.
Value Stream Mapping: How to Visualize Work and Align
Leadership for Organizational Transformation. New York: McGraw-Hill Education, 2013.
Matts, Chris. “Constraints that Enable.” The IT Risk Manager (website). December 9, 2018.
https://theitriskmanager.com/2018/12/09/constraints-that-enable/.
Maxwell, John C.
The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership. Thomas Nelson, 2007.
McGilchrist, Iain.
The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Braise and the Making of the
Western World. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2019.
Modig, Niklas, and Par Ahlstrom.
This is Lean: Resolving the Efficiency Paradox. Rheologica
Publishing, 2012.
Panagiotopoulos, Georgios, Constantine Zogopoulos, and Zoe Karanikola. “The Learning
Organization According to Senge: Recording and Validation of the Park Research Tool in
Primary Education Schools in the Prefecture of Ilia.” Global Journal of Human Resource
Management 6, no.5 (November 2018): 1–19. https://www.eajournals.org/wp-
content/uploads/The-Learning-Organization-According-to-Senge.pdf.
Parkinson, Northcote. “Parkinson’s Law.”
The Economist. November 19, 1955.
https://www.economist.com/news/1955/11/19/parkinsons-law.
Pereira, Steve. “Principles of Value Stream Identification.” Value Stream Management
Consortium (website). May 22, 2023. https://www.vsmconsortium.org/blog/principles-of-
value-stream-identification.
Pink, Daniel H.
Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us. Edinburgh: Canongate
Books, 2010.
Reinertsen, Donald G.
The Principles of Product Development Flow: Second Generation Lean
Product Development. Redondo Beach, CA: Celeritas Publishing, 2009.
Ring, Matt, et al. “Measuring Value: Navigating Uncertainty to Build the Right Thing for Our
Customers and Our Business,”
DevOps Enterprise Journal 5, no. 2 (2023).
https://itrevolution.com/product/the-devops-enterprise-journal-fall-2023/.

-- 341 of 353 --

Romanukha, Andriy. “Stop Starting, Start Finishing with Agile.” ReadWrite. Last modified March
23, 2023. https://readwrite.com/stop-starting-start-finishing-with-agile.
R0senblueth, A., and N. Wiener, “The Role of Models in Science,”
Philosophy of Science 12 (1945).
Rother, Mike.
Toyota Kata: Managing People for Improvement, Adaptiveness, and Superior
Results. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2009.
Rother, Mike, and John Shook
. Learning to See: Value Stream Mapping to Add Value and
Eliminate Muda. Cambridge, MA: Lean Enterprise Institute, 2003.
Saldanha, Tony.
Why Digital Transformations Fail: The Surprising Disciplines of How to Take
Off and Stay Ahead. Oakland, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 2019.
Senge, Peter M.
The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of the Learning Organization. New York:
Doubleday, 2006.
Sheth, Bhavin R., and Ryan Young, “Two Visual Pathways in Primates Based on Sampling of
Space: Exploitation and Exploration of Visual Information.”
Frontiers in Integrative
Neuroscience 10, no. 37 (November 2016). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2016.00037.
Schulz, Kathryn.
Being Wrong: Adventures in the Margin of Error. Ecco, 2011.
Sipser, Michael.
Introduction to the Theory of Computation. 3rd ed. Boston: Cengage Learning,
2012.
Skelton, Matthew, and Manuel Pais.
Team Topologies: Organizing Business and Technology
Teams for Fast Flow. Portland, OR: IT Revolution, 2019.
Slater, Daniel. “Powering Innovation and Speed with Amazon’s Two-Pizza Teams.” Amazon Web
Services Executive Insights. 2023. https://d1.awsstatic.com/executive-
insights/en_US/two_pizza_teams_eBook.pdf.
Smith, Adam.
The Wealth of Nations. Edited by Andrew Skinner. New York: Penguin Publishing
Group, 1999.
Spear, Steven J.
The High-Velocity Edge: How Market Leaders Leverage Operational Excellence
to Beat the Competition. New York: McGraw Hill, 2010.
Spiegel, Alix. “Teachers’ Expectation Can Influence How Students Perform.” NPR. September 17,
2012. https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2012/09/18/161159263/teachers-
expectations-can-influence-how-students-perform.
Sproule, Michael J. “Organizational Rhetoric and the Public Sphere.”
Communication Studies 40,
no. 4 (1989): 258–265. https://doi.org/10.1080/10510978909368279.
Stickdorn, Mark, et al.
This Is Service Design Doing: Applying Service Design Thinking in the
Real World. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2018.
Sussna, Jeff.
Designing Delivery: Rethinking IT in the Digital Service Economy. Sebastopol, CA:
O’Reilly Media, 2015.
Thrasher, Paula. “Interactive Virtual Value Stream Mapping - Visualizing Flow in a Virtual
World.” Presentation at the 2020 DevOps Enterprise Summit in 2020. 35:54.
https://videos.itrevolution.com/watch/466912411/.

-- 342 of 353 --

Vacanti, Daniel. “Little’s Law and System Stability.” Interview by Klaus Leopold. LEANability, June
8, 2017. https://www.leanability.com/en/blog/2017/08/littles-law-and-system-stability/.
van der Kolk, Berend. “Can Performance Metrics Harm Performance?” Insights. November 9,
2018. https://www.ie.edu/insights/articles/can-performance-metrics-harm-performance/.
van der Kolk, B., and W. Kaufmann. “Performance Measurement, Cognitive Dissonance and
Coping Strategies: Exploring Individual Responses to NPM-Inspired Output Control.”
Journal
of Management Control 29 (2018): 93–113.
Vas, Zsófia. “Role of Proximity in Regional Clusters: Evidence from the Software Industry.” In
Regional Competitiveness, Innovation and Environment, edited by Zoltán Bajmócy and Imre
Lengyel, 162–182. Szeged: JATEPress, 2009.
West, Geoffrey B.
Scale: The Universal Laws of Growth, Innovation, Sustainability, and the Pace
of Life in Organisms, Cities, Economies, and Companies. New York: Penguin Books, 2017.
Wiener, Norbert.
Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948.
Wiener, Norbert.
The Human Use of Human Beings: Cybernetics and Society. New York:
Hachette Books, 1988.
Wikipedia. “Abilene paradox.” Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abilene_paradox#cite_note-Harvey-3.
Wikipedia. “IKEA effect.” Accessed December 1, 2023. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IKEA_effect.
Wikipedia. “Metcalfe’s law.” Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%27s_law.
Wikipedia. “Ringelmann effect.” Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ringelmann_effect.
Wikipedia. “Six sigma.” Accessed December 8, 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Six_Sigma
Wikipedia. “Teleology.” Accessed December 8, 2020. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teleology.
Wikipedia. “Time and motion study.” Accessed December 1, 2023.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_and_motion_study.
Womack, James P., and Daniel T. Jones.
Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Your
Organization. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Womack, James P., Daniel T. Jones, and Daniel Roos.
The Machine That Changed the World.
New York: Free Press, 2007.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 343 of 353 --

Notes
Introduction
1. Blanchard, “No One of Us Is as Smart as All of Us.”
2. Sheth and Young, “Two Visual Pathways in Primates Based on
Sampling of Space.”
3. Saldanha,
Why Digital Transformations Fail.
4. Martin,
Clarity First.
Chapter 1
1. “Peter F. Drucker Quotes.”
2. West,
Scale, 32.
3. “Amazon: Number of Employees”; Greene, “Amazon’s Big Holiday
Shopping Advantage.”
4. Mark, Gonzalez, and Harris, “No Task Left Behind?”
5. Katz and Miller,
Opening Doors to Teamwork and Collaboration,
87.
6. “Employee Engagement.”
7. Gallup, “State of the Global Workplace: 2023 Report.”
8. Pink,
Drive.
9. Duhigg, “What Google Learned from Its Quest to Build the Perfect
Team.”
10. Criscuolo, Salter, and Wal, “The Role of Proximity.”
11. Vas, “Role of Proximity in Regional Clusters,” 162–182.
12. Kim and Spear,
Wiring the Winning Organization, xxviii.

-- 344 of 353 --

13. Wikipedia, “Ringelmann effect.”
14. Mao et al., “An Experimental Study of Team Size.”
15. Mao et al., “An Experimental Study of Team Size.”
16. Slater, “Powering Innovation and Speed with Amazon’s Two-Pizza
Teams.”
17. Hern, “The Two-Pizza Rule and the Secret of Amazon’s Success.”
18. Sproule, “Organizational Rhetoric and the Public Sphere.”
19. Sipser,
Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 348.
20. Carpentier, “New Economics for Sustainable Development
Attention Economy.”
21. Atkinson, “Manpower Strategies for Flexible Organisations.”
22. Wikipedia, “Metcalfe’s law.”
23. Brooks,
The Mythical Man-Month, 25.
24. “Churchill and the Commons Chamber.”
25. Kazempour et al., “The Checkbox Project.”
26. DeGrandis,
Making Work Visible, 43.
27. Wikipedia, “Time and motion study.”
28. Brooks,
Mythical Man-Month, 7.
Chapter 2
1. Wikipedia, “IKEA effect.”
2. Martin,
The Great Transition, 16.
3. Martin,
The Great Transition, 104.
4. Rother,
Toyota Kata, 18.
Chapter 4
1. Wikipedia, “Abilene paradox.”
Chapter 5
1. Wikipedia, “Teleology.”

-- 345 of 353 --

2. Rosenblueth and Wiener, “The Role of Models in Science,” 320.
3. Boston Consulting Group, “Flipping the Odds of Digital
Transformation Success.”
4. Bryar and Carr,
Working Backwards, 98–120.
5. Lewis,
Moneyball, 59.
6. “Accelerating Change.”
7. Grant, “Are You a Giver or a Taker?”
8. Hagger et al., “Autonomous and Controlled Motivational
Regulations.”
Chapter 6
1. Rother and Shook,
Learning to See, 26
.
2. Pereira, “Principles of Value Stream Identification.”
3. Gilbreth and Gilbreth,
Process Charts, 4.
4. Rother and Shook,
Learning to See, 13.
5. Thrasher, “Interactive Virtual Value Stream Mapping.”
6. Womack and Jones,
Lean Thinking, 29.
7. Reinertsen,
The Principles of Product Development Flow, 35.
8. Kalbach,
Mapping Experiences.
9. Gabbert, Hope, and Fisher, “Protecting Eyewitness Evidence.”
10. Cutler, “TBM 34/52.”
11. Martin and Osterling,
Value Stream Mapping, 72.
12. Jim Benson, personal conversation with the authors, 2023.
13. Lipmanowicz and McCandless, “15% Solutions.”
Chapter 7
1. Parkinson, “Parkinson’s Law.”
2. Covey,
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, 66
.
Chapter 8

-- 346 of 353 --

1. DeGrandis,
Making Work Visible, 2.
2. Romanukha, “Stop Starting, Start Finishing with Agile.”
Chapter 9
1. Stickdorn et al.,
This Is Service Design Doing, 139.
2. Martin and Osterling,
Value Stream Mapping, 27.
3. Kersten,
Project to Product, 90.
4. Burrows, “#2MBM: Meaning before Metric, Measure before
Method.”
5. Cutler, “TBM 245.”
Chapter 10
1. Capra and Luisi,
The Systems View of Life, 316.
2. As quoted in Kim,
The Unicorn Project, 3.
3. Beck et al. “Manifesto for Agile Software Development.”
4. Cottmeyer, “LK2009 Anderson, Scotland, and Hathaway.”
5. Womack and Jones,
Lean Thinking, 29–90.
6. Ring et al. “Measuring Value.”
7. Ring et al. “Measuring Value.”
8. McGilchrist,
The Master and His Emissary, 47.
9. Deming,
Out of the Crisis, 22.
10. Sheth and Young, “Two Visual Pathways in Primates.”
11. Liker and Convis,
The Toyota Way, 149.
12. Liker and Convis,
The Toyota Way, vi.
13. Modig and Ahlstrom,
This is Lean, 9.
14. Ackoff,
The Democratic Corporation, 23.
15. Magennis, “How Does Utilization Impact Lead-Time of Work?” This
site provides an excellent calculator to illustrate the mathematics of
high utilization.
16. Deming,
Out of the Crisis, Chapter 2.

-- 347 of 353 --

17. Wikipedia, “Six sigma.”
18. Goldratt,
The Goal, Chapter 17.
19. Goldratt,
The Haystack Syndrome.
20. Spear,
The High-Velocity Edge, 183.
21. Deming,
Out of the Crisis, Chapter 8.
22. Schulz,
Being Wrong, 5.
Chapter 11
1. Maxwell,
The 21 Irrefutable Laws of Leadership, 11.
2. Quote is commonly attributed to Peter Drucker.
3. Cynefin.io, “Constraints.”
4. Mangot, “Make the Right Way the Easy Way.”
5. Matts, “Constraints that Enable.”
6. Panagiotopoulos, Zogopoulos, and Karanikola, “The Learning
Organization According to Senge.”
7. Senge,
The Fifth Discipline, 12
8. Spiegel, “Teachers’ Expectation Can Influence How Students
Perform.”
9. Liker and Convis,
The Toyota Way to Lean Leadership, 41.
10. Hagemann et al.,
Trends in Executive Development.
Chapter 12
1. “The Biggest Startup.”
2. Anderson,
Learning to Lead, Leading to Learn, 171.
3. Forsgren, Humble, and Kim,
Accelerate, Chapter 3.
Chapter 13
1. Hines, “Value Stream Management.”
2. Goldratt,
The Haystack Syndrome, 26.

-- 348 of 353 --

3. van der Kolk and Kaufmann, “Performance Measurement, Cognitive
Dissonance and Coping Strategies.”
4. van der Kolk, “Can Performance Metrics Harm Performance?”
5. Reinertsen,
The Principles of Product Development Flow, 33.
6. Clark, “Inspect.”
7. Inspired by Cutler, “TBM 7/52: Two Bets.”
Chapter 14
1. Martin,
The Great Transition, 63.
2. Kersten,
Project to Product, 111.
3. “A Brief History of AWS.”
4. Anderson, McCann, and O’Reilly,
The Value Flywheel Effect.
5. Clanton et al.,
Getting Started with Dojos, 4.
6. Ross Clanton, as quoted in Cote,
Monolithic Transformation
7. Kniberg and Ivarsson,
Scaling Agile @ Spotify.
8. Skelton and Pais,
Team Topologies, 130.
9. Covey,
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, 38.
10. Magennis, “Impact of Multiple Team Dependencies.”
Conclusion
1. Arnold and Yüce, “Black Swan Farming Using Cost of Delay.”
2. Clanton et al.,
The Project to Product Transformation.
3. Womack and Jones,
Lean Thinking, 320.
Appendix
1. Vacanti, interview.
2. Bongers et al., “How Long Does It Take To Refocus,” 420–439.
3. Based on personal experience reports and from multiple
practitioners we’ve spoken to.

-- 349 of 353 --

OceanofPDF.com

-- 350 of 353 --

Acknowledgments
We’re incredibly grateful to so many who have inspired, informed, and
improved the ideas and practices collected in this book. We’ve been
tremendously fortunate to leverage the collective learning of great
thinkers from across the Lean, cybernetics, systems thinking,
collaboration, Agile, and DevOps communities. We’ve also been lucky to
have the opportunity to test and implement the material in this book
across organizations large and small, with leaders who were courageous
and trusting enough to try something different.
Thanks to our friends Karen Martin, Dominica DeGrandis, Jez
Humble, and Mik Kersten for their pioneering contributions to our
understanding of mapping and improving flow, sharing their experience
and their generosity as guides. To our friends Adam Hawkins, Carmen
DeArdo, Courtney Kissler, Fritjof Capra, Gary Gruver, Gene Kim, Helen
Beal, Jeremy Akers, Jim Benson, João Rosa, John Cutler, John Willis, Jon
Smart, Manuel Pais, Matthew Skelton, Mixel Kiemen, Nicole Helmerich,
Patrick Debois, Paula Thrasher, Peter Maddison, Steve Spear, and Vera
Hofmann for sharing experience, support, and brilliant thinking to
improve this book and its practices.
Andrew owes a special debt to Meredith Bell and Sandrine Olivencia
for helping and inspiring AutoRABIT on the journey to becoming a lean
organization.
Thank you to our patient and supportive families for making space
and energy for this book to grow.

-- 351 of 353 --

Thank you to our Flow Collective community and to all the other
people who inspired and collaborated with us on so many ideas,
concepts, and practices over the years.
Finally, huge thanks to our editorial team, Anna Noak and Leah
Brown, who shepherded us through this journey with incredible skill and
patience.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 352 of 353 --

About the Authors
Steve Pereira has spent over two decades improving the flow of work
across organizations. He’s worked through tech support, IT
management, platform and infrastructure engineering, product
management, and as a founding CTO for enterprise SaaS. He serves as
CEO of Visible Consulting, as COO to the Value Stream Management
Consortium, Chair of the OASIS VSM Interoperability technical
committee, and co-founder of the Flow Collective to bring flow-focused
professionals together. Since 2017, he has been developing and
facilitating Flow Engineering to make flow improvement in large
organizations accessible, collaborative, and actionable.
Andrew Davis is Chief Product Officer at AutoRABIT and the author of
Mastering Salesforce DevOps. He’s a Salesforce architect, developer, and
product leader with a focus on the human side of software development.
He’s been the leading figure in introducing DevOps concepts to the
Salesforce world. Trained as an engineer, he spent fifteen years as a
Buddhist monk, teaching meditation and personal transformation and
helping develop communities of practice. These days he studies the
intersection of business, technology, and psychology through systems
thinking. He is co-founder of the Center for Harmonious Living with his
wife, Ashley, to promote healthier ways of approaching work and life.
OceanofPDF.com

-- 353 of 353 --

